 



Book One - General Rules
List of contents

1. Chapter I - Limits of the Applicability of Criminal Provisions in Legislation
2. Chapter II - Criminal
3. Chapter III - Matters that Eliminate, Reduce or Aggravate Criminal Punishment
4. Chapter IV - Experiment
5. Chapter V - Participation in Criminal Acts
6. Chapter VI - Concurrent Criminal Acts
7. Chapter VII - Filing and Withdrawing Complaints in Cases of Crimes Prosecuted Only on Complaint
8. Chapter VIII - Elimination of the Authority to Prosecute and Execute Criminal Sentences
9. Chapter IX - Meaning of Some Terms Used in the Code
10. Closing Rules

Chapter I - Limits of the Applicability of Criminal Provisions in Legislation
article 1

(1) An act cannot be punished, except based on the force of existing criminal law provisions.

(2) If there is a change in legislation after the act has been committed, then the provisions that are most advantageous to the defendant will be applied.

Article 2

Criminal provisions in Indonesian legislation are applied to anyone who commits a crime in Indonesia.

Article 3

Criminal provisions in Indonesian legislation apply to any person who, outside Indonesian territory, commits a crime in an Indonesian water vehicle or aircraft.


Article 4

Criminal provisions in Indonesian law apply to anyone who commits outside Indonesia:

1. one of the crimes under articles 104, 106, 107, 108, and
131.

2. a crime concerning currency or paper money issued by a country or bank, or concerning stamps issued and brands used by the Indonesian Government.

3. falsification of debt letters or debt certificates on behalf of Indonesia, on behalf of a region or part of a region of Indonesia, including falsification of stamps, dividend marks or interest marks, which accompany the letter or certificate, and marks issued as a substitute for the letter, or using the above-mentioned letters, which are fake or falsified, as if they were genuine and not falsified;

4. One of the crimes mentioned in articles 438, 444 to 446 concerning sea piracy and article 447 concerning the surrender of water vehicles to the power of sea pirates and article 479 letter j concerning unlawful control of aircraft, article 479 letters I, m, n, and o concerning crimes that threaten the safety of civil aviation.


Article 5

(1) Criminal provisions in Indonesian legislation apply to citizens who, outside Indonesia, commit:

1. one of the crimes mentioned in Chapters I and II of Book Two and articles 160, 161, 240, 279, 450, and 451.

2. an act which is considered a crime by a criminal provision in Indonesian legislation, whereas according to the legislation of the country where the act was committed, it is punishable by criminal law.

(2) Prosecution of the case as referred to in point 2 may also be carried out if the accused becomes a citizen after committing the act.

Article 6

The application of Article 5 paragraph 1 point 2 is limited in such a way that the death penalty is not imposed if, according to the laws of the country where the act was committed, the death penalty is not threatened against him.

Article 7

The criminal provisions in Indonesian legislation apply to any official who outside Indonesia commits one of the criminal acts as referred to in Chapter XXVIII of Book Two Article 8. The criminal provisions in Indonesian legislation apply to the captain and passengers of Indonesian vessels, who outside Indonesia, even outside the vessel, commit one of the criminal acts as referred to in Chapter XXIX of Book Two, and Chapter IX of Book Three; as well as those mentioned in the regulations regarding sea letters and ship passes in Indonesia, as well as in the Shipping Ordinance.

Article 9

The application of articles 2-5, 7 and 8 is limited by the exceptions recognized in international law.

Chapter II - Criminal

Article 10

The criminal penalties include:


a. main criminal offense:


1. death penalty;

2. imprisonment;

3. imprisonment;

4. criminal fines;

5. criminal cover-up.

b. additional penalties

1. revocation of certain rights;

2. confiscation of certain goods;

3. announcement of the judge's decision.

Article 11

The death penalty is carried out by the executioner on the gallows by tying a rope tied to the gallows around the convict's neck and then dropping the board on which the convict is standing.

Article 12

(1) The penalty for imprisonment is life imprisonment or for a certain period of time.

(2) Imprisonment for a certain period of time, a minimum of one day and a maximum of fifteen consecutive years.

(3) A prison sentence of a fixed term may be imposed for twenty consecutive years in the case of crimes for which the judge may choose between the death penalty, life imprisonment and a fixed term of imprisonment, or between life imprisonment and a fixed term of imprisonment; this also applies in cases where the fifteen year limit is exceeded due to additional punishment due to concurrent, repeated or as stipulated in Article 52.

(4) A prison sentence for a certain period may in no case exceed twenty years.


Article 13

The convicts sentenced to prison are divided into several groups.

Article 14

Convicts who are sentenced to imprisonment are obliged to carry out all work assigned to them based on the implementing provisions of Article 29.

Article 14a

(1) If the judge imposes a maximum sentence of one year or imprisonment, not including substitute imprisonment, then in his decision the judge may also order that the sentence need not be served, unless at a later date there is a judge's decision which determines otherwise, because the convict committed a crime before the probation period specified in the order above expired, or because the convict during the probation period did not fulfill special conditions which may be specified otherwise in the order.

(2) The judge also has the authority as above, except in cases concerning state income and rent when imposing a fine, but it must be clear to him that the fine or confiscation that may be ordered will also be very burdensome for the convict. In applying this paragraph, opium crimes and violations are only considered as cases concerning state income, if it is determined that in the case of imposing a fine, the provisions of Article 30 paragraph 2 do not apply.


(3) If the judge does not determine otherwise, then the order regarding the principal penalty also applies to the principal penalty and also to additional penalties.

(4) An order will not be given unless the judge, after careful investigation, is convinced that sufficient supervision can be carried out to ensure that the general conditions are met, that the convict will not commit a crime, and special conditions, if any, are stipulated.

(5) The order in paragraph 1 must be accompanied by matters or circumstances which are the reason for the order.

Article 14b

(1) Probationary period for crimes and violations in articles 492, 504, 505,
506, and 536 a maximum of three years and for other violations a maximum of two years.

(2) The probationary period begins when the decision has become final and has been notified to the convict in the manner determined by law.

(3) The probationary period does not count as long as the convict is legally detained.

Article 14c

(1) With the order referred to in Article 14a, unless a fine is imposed, in addition to setting a general condition that the convict will not commit a crime, the judge can set a special condition that the convict, within a certain time, which is shorter than the probation period, must replace all or part of the losses caused by the crime.



(2) If the judge imposes a prison sentence of more than three months or a prison sentence for one of the violations based on articles 492, 504, 505, 506 and 536, then other special conditions may be applied regarding the convict's behavior which must be fulfilled during the probationary period or during part of the probationary period.


(3) The above conditions may not reduce the freedom of religion or political freedom of the convict.

Article 14d

(1) The person entrusted with overseeing that the conditions are met is the official who has the authority to order the execution of the decision, if there is an order to execute the decision.

(2) If there is a reason, the judge may order to require an institution which is a legal entity and is domiciled in Indonesia, or the head of a shelter home domiciled there, or certain officials, to provide aid or assistance to the convict in fulfilling special requirements.


(3) Further regulations regarding the supervision and assistance mentioned above, as well as regarding the appointment of institutions and leaders of shelters that can be entrusted with such assistance, are regulated by law.

Article 14e

At the suggestion of the official in article paragraph 1, or at the request of the convict, the judge who decides the case in the first instance, during the probation period, can change the special conditions of the probation period. The judge may also order someone other than the person originally ordered to provide assistance to the convict and may also extend the probation period once, at most by half of the maximum time that can be applied for the probation period.

Article 14f

(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the above article, then upon the recommendation of the official in Article 14d paragraph 1, the judge who decides the case in the first instance can order that the sentence be carried out, or order that a warning be given to the convict in his name, namely if the convict commits a crime during the probationary period and therefore there is a sentence that becomes permanent, or if one of the other conditions is not fulfilled, or if the convict is given a sentence that becomes permanent before the probationary period ends, because he committed a crime during the probationary period that came into effect. When giving a warning, the judge must also determine how to give the warning.

(2) After the probationary period has expired, an order for the sentence to be carried out may no longer be given, unless before the probationary period has expired, the convict is prosecuted for committing a crime during the probationary period and the prosecution then ends with the sentence becoming permanent. In that case, within two months after the sentence becomes permanent, the judge may still order that the sentence be carried out, for committing the crime.

Article 15

(1) If the convict has served two-thirds of the prison sentence imposed on him, which must be at least nine months, then he can be given conditional release. If the convict has to serve several sentences consecutively, the sentences are considered as one sentence.

(2) When granting conditional release, a probationary period is also determined, and conditions that must be met during the probationary period are stipulated.

(3) The probationary period is the same length as the remaining time of the prison sentence that has not been served, plus one year. If the convict is in legal detention, then that time is not included in the probationary period.

Article 15a

(1) Conditional release is granted with the general condition that the convict will not commit criminal acts or other bad deeds.

(2) In addition, special conditions may be added regarding the convict's behavior, as long as they do not reduce religious freedom and political freedom.

(3) Those entrusted with supervising that all requirements are fulfilled are the officials referred to in article 14d paragraph 1.

(4) In order to ensure that the conditions are met, special supervision may be carried out which must solely aim to provide assistance to the convict.

(5) During the probationary period, conditions may be changed or removed or new special conditions may be created; and special supervision may also be implemented. This special supervision may be handed over to someone other than the person originally entrusted with it.

(6) A person who receives conditional release is given a pass containing the conditions that must be met. If the things mentioned in the paragraph above are carried out, then the person is given a new pass.

Article 15b

(1) If a person who is given conditional release during the probationary period does things that violate the conditions stated in his/her pass, then the conditional release can be revoked. If there is a strong suspicion that the above things have been done, the Minister of Justice can temporarily stop the conditional release.


(2) The time during which the convict is released on parole until he begins serving his sentence again does not include the time served.

(3) If three months after the probationary period has expired, conditional release cannot be revoked, unless before the three months have elapsed, the convict is charged with committing a crime during the probationary period, and the charge ends with a criminal verdict that becomes final. Conditional release can still be revoked within three months after the verdict becomes final based on the consideration that the convict committed a crime during the probationary period.


Article 16

(1) Conditional release provisions are determined by the Minister of Justice upon the recommendation or after receiving information from the prison administrator where the convict is held, and after receiving information from the prosecutor where the convict is from. Before making a decision, the opinion of the Central Reclassification Council must first be sought, whose duties are regulated by the Minister of Justice.


(2) The provisions for revoking conditional release, as well as the matters referred to in Article 15a paragraph 5, are determined by the Minister of Justice upon the recommendation or after receiving news from the prosecutor from the convict's place of origin. Before making a decision, the opinion of the Central Reclassification Council must first be sought.

(3) As long as the release can still be revoked, then on the orders of the prosecutor at the place where he is, the person who is conditionally released can be detained to maintain public order, if there is a reasonable suspicion that

If the person during the probationary period has committed acts that violate the conditions stated in his/her pass, the prosecutor must immediately notify the Minister of Justice of the detention.

(4) The maximum detention period is sixty days. If detention is followed by a temporary suspension or revocation of conditional release, then the person is deemed to have continued serving his sentence from the time of detention.

Article 17

Examples of pass letters and implementing regulations for articles 15, 15a and 16 are regulated by law.

Article 18

(1) Imprisonment for a minimum of one day and a maximum of one year.

(2) If there is a crime caused by concurrent or repeated acts or due to the provisions of Article 52, the prison sentence may be increased to one year and four months.


(3) Imprisonment may not exceed one year and four months.

Article 19

(1) A person sentenced to imprisonment is obliged to carry out the work assigned to him, in accordance with the implementing regulations of Article 29.

(2) He was given lighter work than someone who was sentenced to prison.

Article 20

(1) A judge who imposes a prison sentence or a maximum of one month's imprisonment may determine that the prosecutor may allow the convict to move freely outside the prison after the work period.

(2) If the convict who has been given freedom does not come at the time and place specified to carry out the work assigned to him, then he must serve his sentence as usual unless his failure to come is not due to his own will.


(3) The provisions in paragraph 1 do not apply to convicts because at the time of committing the crime it has not been two years since they have served their prison sentence or detention sentence.

Article 21

The prison sentence must be served in the area where the convict resides when the judge's decision is carried out, or if he does not have a residence, in the area

where he is, unless the Minister of Justice, at the request of the convict, allows him to serve his sentence in another area.

Article 22

(1) A convict who is serving a sentence of loss of liberty in a place used to serve a prison sentence, or a sentence of detention, or both, may, if requested, serve detention in that place immediately after the sentence of loss of liberty has been completed.

(2) Imprisonment for the reasons above is served in a special place for serving prison sentences, and its nature does not change because of this.

Article 23

People who are sentenced to imprisonment may, at their own expense, simply try to alleviate their fate according to the rules that will be determined by law.

Article 24

People sentenced to prison or detention may be required to work inside or outside the walls of the prison where the convicts are held.

Article 25

Those who must not be assigned work outside the walls of the place are:

1. People who are sentenced to life imprisonment;

2. The women;

3. People who, according to a doctor's examination, are not allowed to carry out such work.

Article 26

If, considering the personal or social circumstances of the convict, the judge considers that there is a reason, then in the decision it will be determined that the convict may not be required to work outside the walls of the place where the convicts are held.

Article 27

The length of a prison sentence for a certain period and the term of imprisonment in a judge's decision is stated in days, weeks, months and years; it cannot be a fraction.

Article 28

Prison sentences and detention sentences can be carried out in one place as long as they are separate.

Article 29

(1) The matter of appointing a place to serve a prison sentence, a prison sentence, or both, as well as the matter of arranging and managing these places, the matter of differentiating convicts into groups, the matter of regulating the provision of teaching, the holding of worship, the matter of order, the matter of a place to sleep, the matter of food and clothing, all of this is regulated by law in accordance with the statute book in accordance with this statute book.

(2) If necessary, the Minister of Justice shall establish household regulations for the places where convicts are held.

Article 30

(1) The minimum fine is three rupiah seventy-five cents.

(2) If the fine is not paid, it will be replaced with imprisonment.

(3) The length of the substitute imprisonment sentence is at least one day and at most six months.

(4) In the judge's decision, the length of the substitute imprisonment is determined as follows: if the fine is seven rupiah fifty-two cents or imprisonment, it is calculated as one day; if it is more than five rupiah fifty cents, each seven rupiah fifty cents is calculated as a maximum of one day, and the remainder which is not enough is seven rupiah fifty cents.


(5) If there is an increase in the fine due to concurrent or repeated acts, or due to the provisions of Article 52, then the substitute imprisonment sentence is a maximum of eight months.

(6) The substitute imprisonment sentence may not exceed eight months.

Article 31

(1) The convict may serve a substitute prison sentence without waiting for the deadline for paying the fine.

(2) He always has the authority to free himself from a substitute prison sentence by paying the fine.

(3) Payment of part of the fine, either before or after starting to serve the prison sentence, which is equal to the part paid.

Article 32

(1) Prison sentences and detention sentences begin to apply to convicts who are already in temporary detention, on the day the judge's decision becomes final, and for other convicts on the day the judge's decision begins to be implemented.

(2) If a judge's decision imposes a prison sentence and a detention sentence for several criminal acts, and then the decision for both of these crimes becomes permanent at the same time, while the convict is already in temporary detention for both or one of the criminal acts, then the prison sentence begins to apply at the time the judge's decision becomes permanent, and the detention sentence begins to apply after the prison sentence has expired.

Article 33

(1) The judge in his decision may determine that the time the convict is in temporary detention before the decision becomes final, is wholly or partly deducted from the prison sentence for a certain period of time from the prison sentence or from the fine imposed on him; in the case of a fine, the measure according to Article 31 paragraph 3 is used.

(2) The time a defendant is in temporary detention without a warrant is not deducted from his sentence, unless the deduction is specifically stated in the judge's decision.


(3) The provisions of this article also apply in cases where the accused is charged together with committing several crimes, and is then convicted of an act other than that for which he was accused while being temporarily detained.

Article 33a

If a person who is temporarily detained is sentenced to imprisonment or confinement, and then he himself or another person with his consent submits a request for clemency, the time from the time the request is submitted until the President's decision is made, shall not be counted as time served for the sentence, unless the President, taking into account the circumstances of the case, determines that all or part of that time shall be counted as time served for the sentence.

Article 34

If a convict escapes while serving his sentence, the time spent outside the place where he is serving his sentence will not be counted as time served.

Article 35

(1) The rights of convicts which may be revoked by a judge's decision in cases determined in this law code, or in other general regulations, are:

1. the right to hold office in general or certain positions;

2. the right to enter the Armed Forces;

3. the right to vote and be elected in elections held based on general rules.

4. the right to be a legal advisor or administrator upon court decision, the right to be a guardian, supervising guardian, custodian or supervising custodian, for a person who is not one's own child;

5. the right to exercise paternal authority, exercise guardianship or guardianship over one's own children;

6. the right to pursue a certain livelihood.

(2) A judge does not have the authority to dismiss an official from his position, if the special regulations specify another authority for the dismissal.

Article 36

The right to hold office in general or a specific office and the right to enter the Armed Forces, except in cases described in Book Two, may be revoked in the case of conviction for a crime of office or a crime that violates the special obligations of a position, or for using the power, opportunity or means given to the convict because of his position.

Article 37

(1) The power of a father, the power of a guardian, supervising guardian, custodian and supervising custodian, both over one's own child and over another person, may be revoked in the event of criminal prosecution:

1. a parent or guardian who intentionally commits a crime together with a minor under his/her authority;

2. parents or guardians of minors under their authority commit crimes as mentioned in chapters XIII, XIV, XV, XVIII, XIX and XX of Book Two.


(2) The revocation referred to in paragraph 1 may not be carried out by a criminal judge against people to whom civil law applies regarding the revocation of parental authority, guardianship authority and guardianship authority.

Article 38

(1) If rights are revoked, the judge determines the duration of the revocation as follows:

1. in the case of the death penalty or life imprisonment, the term of revocation is for life;

2. in the case of a prison sentence for a certain period or a prison sentence, the length of the revocation is at least two years and at most five years longer than the main sentence;

3. In the case of a criminal fine, the term of revocation is at least two years and at most five years.

(2) The revocation of rights shall take effect on the day the judge's decision can be executed.

Article 39

(1) Goods belonging to the convict which were obtained from a crime or which were intentionally used to commit a crime may be confiscated.

(2) In the case of criminal punishment for a crime that was not committed intentionally or due to a violation, a decision of confiscation may also be made based on matters determined by law.

(3) Confiscation may be carried out against guilty persons who are handed over to the government, but only for goods that have been confiscated.

Article 40

If a person under sixteen years of age possesses, imports or transports goods in violation of the regulations regarding shipping supervision in certain parts of Indonesia, or regulations regarding the prohibition of importing, exporting and forwarding the transport of goods, the judge may impose a penalty of confiscation of the goods, even if the guilty party is returned to his parents, guardian or caretaker without any penalty.


Article 41

(1) Confiscation of previously confiscated goods shall be replaced by imprisonment if the goods are not handed over or their value, according to the judge's decision, is not paid.

(2) This substitute imprisonment is a minimum of one day and a maximum of six months.

(3) The length of this substitute imprisonment sentence is determined in the judge's decision as follows: seven rupiah fifty cents or less is counted as one day; if it is more than seven rupiah fifty cents, each seven rupiah fifty cents is counted as a maximum of one day, and likewise the remainder which is not enough is seven rupiah fifty cents.

(4) Article 31 applies to this substitute imprisonment sentence.

(5) If the confiscated items are handed over, this substitute imprisonment sentence will also be removed.

Article 42

All costs for imprisonment and confinement are borne by the state, and all income from fines and confiscation belongs to the state.

Article 43

If the judge orders that the verdict be announced based on this code or other general rules, he must also determine how to carry out the order at the expense of the convict.

Chapter III - Matters that Eliminate, Reduce or Aggravate Criminal Punishment
Article 44

(1) Anyone who commits an act for which he cannot be held responsible because his soul is disabled in growth or disturbed by illness, shall not be punished.


(2) If it turns out that the act cannot be held responsible for the perpetrator because his mental development is defective or disturbed due to illness, the judge can order that the person be admitted to a mental hospital for a maximum of one year as a probationary period.

(3) The provisions in paragraph 2 only apply to the Supreme Court, High Court and District Court.

Article 45

In the case of criminal prosecution of a minor for committing an act before the age of sixteen, the judge may determine: to order that the guilty person be returned to his parents, guardian or caretaker, without any punishment; or to order that the guilty person be handed over to the government without any punishment, if the act constitutes a crime or one of the violations based on articles 489, 490, 492, 496, 497,
503 - 505, 514, 517 - 519, 526, 531, 532, 536, and 540 and two years have not passed since being found guilty of committing a crime or one of the violations mentioned above, and the decision has become final; or to impose a punishment on the guilty person.


Article 46

(1) If the judge orders that the guilty person be handed over to the government, then he is placed in a state educational home to receive education from the government or at a later date in another way, or handed over to a certain person residing in Indonesia or to a legal entity, foundation or charitable institution domiciled in Indonesia to organize his education, or at a later date, at the expense of the government, in another way; in both cases above, at the latest until the guilty person reaches the age of eighteen years.


(2) The rules for implementing paragraph 1 of this article are determined by law.

Article 47

(1) If the judge imposes a sentence, the maximum principal sentence for the crime is reduced by one third.

(2) If the act is a crime punishable by death or life imprisonment, then a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years shall be imposed.


(3) Additional penalties in Article 10 point b, numbers 1 and 3, cannot be applied.

Article 48

Anyone who commits an act due to the influence of coercion will not be punished.

Article 49

(1) No one shall be punished if he carries out an act of forced self-defense for himself or another person, his or her own moral honor or property or that of another person, because there is an attack or threat of an attack which is very imminent at that time which is against the law.

(2) Self-defense that goes beyond the limits, which is directly caused by severe mental shock due to the attack or threat of attack, is not punishable.


Article 50

Anyone who carries out an act to implement the provisions of the law will not be punished.

Article 51

(1) Anyone who carries out an act to carry out an official order given by an authorized official shall not be punished.

(2) Official orders without authority do not result in the removal of the criminal penalty, unless the person receiving the order, in good faith, thought that the order was given with authority and its implementation was within the scope of his work.

Article 52

If an official, by committing a criminal act, violates a special obligation of his position, or when committing a criminal act uses the power, opportunity or means given to him by reason of his position, his sentence may be increased by one third.

Article 52a

If the national flag of the Republic of Indonesia is used at the time of committing a crime, the penalty for that crime is increased by one third.

Chapter IV - Experiment

Article 53

(1) Attempting to commit a crime is punishable if the intention to do so is evident from the commencement of the act, and the failure to complete the act is not solely due to one's own will.

(2) The maximum principal penalty for a crime, in the case of an attempt, is reduced by one third.

(3) If the crime is punishable by death or life imprisonment, a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years shall be imposed.

(4) Additional penalties for attempted crimes are the same as for completed crimes.

Article 54

Attempting to commit an offense is not punishable.

Chapter V - Participation in Criminal Acts
Article 55

(1) Punished as a perpetrator of a crime:

1. those who do it, who order it to do it, and who participate in doing it;


2. those who, by giving or promising something, abuse their power or dignity, with violence, threats or deception, or by providing opportunities, means or information, intentionally encourage others to commit acts.


(2) With respect to the proponent, only actions that are deliberately recommended are taken into account, along with their consequences.

Article 56

Convicted as an accessory to a crime:

1. those who intentionally provide assistance when a crime is committed;

2. those who intentionally provide the opportunity, means or information to commit a crime.

Article 57

(1) In cases of assistance, the maximum principal penalty for the crime is reduced by one third.

(2) If the crime is punishable by death or life imprisonment, a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years shall be imposed.

(3) Additional penalties for assistance are the same as the crime itself.

(4) In determining the punishment for an assistant, only the acts that were deliberately facilitated or expedited by him, along with their consequences, are taken into account.

Article 58

In applying criminal rules, a person's personal circumstances, which eliminate, reduce or aggravate the imposition of punishment, are only taken into account in relation to the perpetrator or accomplice concerned.

Article 59

In cases where a violation results in criminal penalties for the management, members of the management body or commissioners, then the management, members of the management body or commissioners who are found not to have been involved in committing the violation will not be punished.

Article 60

Assisting in committing an offense is not punishable.

Article 61

(1) Regarding crimes committed by printing, such disciplinary action shall not be prosecuted if the printed matter mentions the name and place of residence, while the maker is known, or after prosecution has begun, at the time of the first warning and then notified to the publisher.

(2) This rule does not apply if the perpetrator cannot be prosecuted at the time the printed material is published or has already resided outside Indonesia.

Article 62

(1) Regarding crimes committed by printing, the printer shall not be prosecuted if his name and place of residence are stated in the printed material, while the person who ordered the printing is known, or after the prosecution begins, when first warned and then notified by the printer.

(2) This rule does not apply if the person who orders printing at the time the printed material is published cannot be prosecuted for having resided outside Indonesia.

Chapter VI - Concurrent Criminal Acts
Article 63

(1) If an act falls under more than one criminal regulation, then only one of these regulations will be imposed; if they differ, the one containing the most severe main criminal threat will be imposed.

(2) If an act falls under a general criminal regulation, but is also regulated in a special criminal regulation, then only the special one will be applied.

Article 64

(1) If several acts, even though each is a crime or violation, are related in such a way that they must be viewed as one continuous act, then only one criminal regulation applies; if they differ, the one containing the most severe main criminal threat applies.


(2) Likewise, only one criminal provision applies if a person is found guilty of counterfeiting or destroying currency, and using the counterfeited or damaged goods.

(3) However, if a person commits the crimes mentioned in Articles 364, 373, 379 and 407 paragraph 1, as a continuing act and the value of the losses incurred exceeds three hundred and seventy-five rupiah, then he is subject to the criminal provisions mentioned in Articles 362, 372, 378 and 406.

Article 65

(1) In the case of several acts being committed together which must be seen as separate acts and thus constitute several crimes, which are subject to the same basic punishment, only one punishment shall be imposed.

(2) The maximum penalty imposed is the maximum penalty threatened for the act, but may be more than the maximum penalty plus one third.


Article 66

(1) In the case of several acts being committed together, each of which must be seen as an independent act, thus constituting several crimes, which are threatened with different principal penalties, then a penalty shall be imposed for each crime, but the total may not exceed the maximum penalty for the most severe plus one third.

(2) The criminal fine is calculated according to the maximum length of the substitute imprisonment determined for the act.

Article 67

If a person is sentenced to death or life imprisonment, no other punishment may be imposed except the revocation of certain rights and the announcement of the judge's decision.

Article 68

(1) Based on the matters in articles 65 and 66, regarding additional penalties, the following rules apply:

1. The same criminal penalties of revocation of rights are combined into one, with a minimum term of two years and a maximum term of five years exceeding the principal penalty or principal penalties imposed. If the principal penalty is only a fine, then the term of revocation of rights shall be a minimum of two years and a maximum of five years;

2. different criminal penalties of revocation of rights are imposed separately without reduction;

3. Criminal penalties for confiscation of certain goods, as well as substitute imprisonment for goods not being handed over, are imposed separately without reduction.

(2) The total number of substitute imprisonment sentences may not exceed eight months.

Article 69

(1) The comparison of the severity of different principal penalties is determined according to the sequence in Article 10.

(2) If the judge chooses between several principal penalties, then in the comparison only the most severe is used.

(3) The comparison of the severity of similar principal crimes is determined according to their respective maximums.

(4) The comparison of the length of similar principal sentences is determined according to their respective maximums.

Article 70

(1) If there is a conjunction as referred to in articles 65 and 66, either a conjunction of a violation with a crime, or a violation with a violation, then for each violation a separate punishment will be imposed without reduction.

(2) Regarding violations, the total length of imprisonment and substitute imprisonment is a maximum of one year and four months, while the total length of substitute imprisonment is a maximum of eight months.

Article 70 bis
When applying articles 65, 66, and 70, crimes based on articles 302 paragraph 1, 352, 364, 373, 379, and 482 are considered violations, with the understanding that if prison sentences are imposed for these crimes, the maximum amount is eight months.


Article 71

If a person has been sentenced to a crime, and is then found guilty again for committing another crime or offense before the criminal verdict, then the previous sentence will be taken into account in the sentence to be imposed using the rules in this chapter regarding cases being tried at the same time.


Chapter VII - Filing and Withdrawing Complaints in Cases of Crimes Charged Only Upon Complaint
Article 72

(1) As long as the person is affected by a crime which may only be prosecuted upon complaint, and that person is not yet sixteen years old and is yet to become an adult, or as long as he is under custody due to something other than extravagance, then his legal representative in civil cases has the right to complain;

(2) If there is no representative, or the representative himself is the one who must be complained about, then the prosecution is carried out based on the complaint of the supervising guardian or supervisory guardian, or the council that is the supervising guardian or supervisory guardian; it is also possible based on the complaint of his wife or a blood relative in the direct line, or if there is none, based on the complaint of a blood relative in the divergent line up to the third degree.

Article 73

If the person who was convicted of a crime dies within the time limit specified in the following article, then without extending the time limit, prosecution will be carried out based on the complaint of the parents, children or husband (wife) who are still alive, unless it turns out that the deceased did not want prosecution.

Article 74

(1) A complaint may only be submitted within six months of the person entitled to complain becoming aware of the crime, if residing in Indonesia, or within nine months if residing outside Indonesia.

(2) If the person who has been convicted of a crime has the right to complain before the time limit mentioned in paragraph 1 has expired, then after that time, the complaint may still be submitted only for the remaining time period.

Article 75

The person who files a complaint has the right to withdraw it within three months after the complaint is filed.

Chapter VIII - Elimination of the Authority to Prosecute and Execute Criminal Sentences
Article 76

(1) Except in cases where the judge's decision may still be repeated, a person may not be prosecuted twice for an act for which an Indonesian judge has already tried him with a final decision.

In the sense of Indonesian judges, including judges of the autonomous and customary courts, in places that have such courts.

(2) If the decision that becomes final comes from another judge, then no prosecution may be carried out against that person and because of that criminal act in the following cases:

1. a decision in the form of acquittal or release from legal charges;


2. the decision is in the form of a criminal sentence and has been carried out in full or has been given a pardon or the authority to carry it out has been revoked due to the statute of limitations.

Article 77

The authority to prosecute is removed if the accused dies.

Article 78

(1) The authority to prosecute criminal charges is removed due to the statute of limitations:

1. regarding all violations and crimes committed with printing after one year;

2. regarding crimes which are punishable by a fine, imprisonment or a maximum of three years imprisonment, after six years;


3. regarding crimes punishable by imprisonment of more than three years, after twelve years;

4. regarding crimes punishable by death or life imprisonment, after eighteen years.

(2) For persons who at the time of committing the act were under eighteen years of age, each of the above statutes of limitations is reduced by one third.

Article 79

The statute of limitations shall begin to apply on the day after the act is committed, except in the following cases:
1. Regarding counterfeiting or damage to currency, the grace period begins on the day after the counterfeit goods or damaged currency are used:

2. Regarding crimes in articles 328, 329, 330 and 333, the grace period begins on the day after the person directly affected by the crime is released or dies;

3. Regarding violations in Articles 556 to 558a, the grace period begins on the day after the lists containing the violations, according to the general rules which stipulate that civil registry registers must be transferred to the clerk's office of a court, are transferred to that office.

Article 80

(1) Every action of prosecution stops the statute of limitations, provided that the action is known to the person being prosecuted, or has been notified to him in the manner determined in the general rules.

(2) After termination, a new expiration date begins.

Article 81

Postponement of criminal prosecution due to pre-judicial disputes, postponing the statute of limitations.

Article 82

(1) The authority to prosecute violations that are punishable by a fine alone is revoked if the maximum fine and costs incurred are voluntarily paid if prosecution has begun, by the authority of an official appointed for this purpose by general regulations, and within a time period determined by him.

(2) If, in addition to a fine, confiscation is determined, the goods subject to confiscation must also be handed over, or their price must be paid according to the official's estimate in paragraph 1.

(3) In cases where the criminal penalty is increased due to repetition, the increase remains applicable even though the authority to prosecute criminal charges for previously committed violations has been removed based on paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article.

(4) The provisions in this article do not apply to minors who, at the time of committing the act, were not yet sixteen years old.

Article 83

The authority to carry out a sentence is removed if the convict dies.

Article 84

(1) The authority to carry out criminal penalties is removed due to the statute of limitations.

(2) The statute of limitations for all violations is two years, for crimes committed using printing media it is five years, and for other crimes it is the same as the statute of limitations for criminal prosecution, plus one third.


(3) In any case, the statute of limitations may not be less than the length of the sentence imposed.

(4) The authority to carry out the death penalty does not expire.

Article 85

(1) The statute of limitations shall begin to apply on the day after the judge's decision can be executed.

(2) If a convict escapes while serving his sentence, then the next day after the escape a new statute of limitations will come into effect. If a conditional release is revoked, then the next day after the revocation a new statute of limitations will come into effect.

(3) The statute of limitations for the accused during the course of the sentence is suspended according to an order in a general regulation, and also during the time the convict is deprived of his liberty, even if the deprivation of liberty is connected with another sentence.

Chapter IX - The Meaning of Several Terms Used in the Code

Article 86

When it is called a crime, either in the sense of crime in general or in the sense of a particular crime, it includes assistance and attempts to commit a crime, unless stated otherwise by a regulation.

Article 87

It is said that there is treason to commit an act, if the intention to do so is evident from the beginning of the implementation, as intended in article 53.

Article 88

It is said that there is a criminal conspiracy if two or more people have agreed to commit a crime.

Article 88 bis
By overthrowing the government, it is meant to abolish or illegally change the form of government according to the Constitution.

Article 89

Rendering someone unconscious or helpless is equated with using violence.


Article 90

Serious injury means:

• fall ill or receive an injury which gives no hope of recovery at all, or which poses a danger of death;
• unable to continue to carry out job duties or search work;
• loss of one of the five senses;
• have a serious disability;
• suffering from paralysis;
• impaired thinking for more than four weeks;
• abort or death of a woman's womb.

Article 91

(1) The power of the father also includes the power of the head of the family.

(2) By parents, we also mean the head of the family.

(3) By father, we also mean a person who exercises the same power as a father.


(4) By child, we also mean a person who is under the same authority as the father.

Article 92

(1) Those referred to as officials also include people who are elected in elections held based on general regulations, as well as people who, not by election, become members of law-making bodies, government bodies,

or representative bodies of the people, formed by the government or on behalf of the government; as well as all members of the subak council, and all heads of the native Indonesian people and heads of the Foreign Eastern group, who exercise legitimate power.


(2) Those referred to as officials and judges also include referees; those referred to as judges also include people who carry out administrative justice, as well as the chairmen and members of religious courts.

(3) All members of the Armed Forces are also considered officials.

Article 92 bis
What is meant by entrepreneur is every person who runs a company.

Article 93

(1) The captain is the person who holds authority on the ship or who represents him.

(2) What is called a passenger is everyone on board the ship, except the captain.

(3) What is called a ship's crew are all officers or sailors on board the ship.


Article 94
This article was abolished based on Law No.1 of 1946, article VIII, point 11.

Article 95

What is meant by an Indonesian ship is a ship that has a sea certificate or ship's pass, or a permit as a temporary substitute according to the general regulations regarding sea certificates and ship's passes in Indonesia.

Article 95a

(1) What is meant by an Indonesian aircraft is an aircraft registered in Indonesia.


(2) Indonesian aircraft also include foreign aircraft chartered without crew and operated by Indonesian airlines.

Article 95b

What is meant by in flight is from the time the outer door of the aircraft is closed after passengers board (embarkation) until the time the door is opened for passengers to disembark (embarkation).

In the event of an emergency landing the flight is deemed to continue until such time as the competent authority takes over responsibility for the aircraft and the goods on board.

Article 95c

What is meant by in service is the period from when the aircraft is prepared by the ground crew or by the flight crew for a particular flight, until 24 hours have passed after each landing.

Article 96

(1) The so-called enemy also includes rebels. This also includes countries or powers that will become opponents in war.

(2) What is called war also includes hostilities with autonomous regions, as well as civil war.

(3) The term wartime also includes the time during which war is threatened. Likewise, it is also said that there is still a wartime period, immediately after the order to mobilize the Armed Forces and as long as that mobilization is in effect.

Article 97

What is called a day is a time of twenty-four hours; what is called a month is a time of thirty days.

Article 98

What is called night time is the time between sunset and sunrise.

Article 99

Climbing also includes entering through an existing hole, but not entering or entering through a hole in the ground that has been deliberately dug; and also crossing a ditch or trench that is used as a boundary.


Article 100

The so-called fake keys include all tools that are not intended to open locks.


Article 101

What is called livestock are all animals with one hoof, ruminant animals and pigs.


Article 101 bis

(1) What is meant by electrical buildings are buildings that are used to generate, transmit, change or transmit electrical energy; as well as tools related to this, namely safety equipment, installation tools, supporting tools and warning tools.


(2) By telegraph and telephone buildings is not meant electrical buildings.


Article 102

Abolished by Staatsblad 1920 No. 382
Closing Rules
Article 103

The provisions in Chapters I to VIII of this book also apply to acts which are punishable by other statutory provisions, unless otherwise stipulated by law.

Book Two – Crime
List of contents

1. Chapter - I Crimes Against State Security
2. Chapter II Crimes Against the Dignity of the President and Vice President
3. Chapter III Crimes Against Friendly Countries and Against Friendly Heads of State and Their Deputies
4. Chapter IV Crimes Against Carrying Out State Obligations and Rights
5. Chapter - V Crimes Against Public Order
6. Chapter - VI Sparring Fight
7. Chapter - VII Crimes that Endanger Public Security for People or Property
8. Chapter - VIII Crimes Against Public Authority
9. Chapter - IX False Oaths and False Statements
10. Chapter - X Counterfeiting of Currency and Banknotes
11. Chapter - XI Forgery of Seals and Brands
12. Chapter - XII Forgery of Letters
13. Chapter - XIII Crimes Against Origin and Marriage
14. Chapter - XIV Crimes Against Morality
15. Chapter - XV Leaving People Who Need Help
16. Chapter - XVI Insult
17. Chapter - XVII Revealing the Secret
18. Chapter - XVIII Crimes Against the Liberty of the Person
19. Chapter - XIX Crimes Against Life
20. Chapter - XX Persecution
21. Chapter - XXI Causing Death or Injury Due to Negligence
22. Chapter - XXII Theft
23. Chapter - XXIII Blackmail and Threats

24. Chapter - XXIV Embezzlement
25. Chapter - XXV Fraudulent Acts
26. Chapter - XXVI Acts that harm debtors or people who have rights
27. Chapter - XXVII Destroying or Damaging Goods
28. Chapter - XXVIII Crimes of Office
29. Chapter - XXIX Maritime Crimes
30. Chapter - XXIX A Aviation Crimes and Crimes Against Aviation Facilities/Infrastructure
31. Chapter - XXX Receipt of Publishing and Printing
Chapter I - Crimes Against State Security
Article 104

Treason with the intent to kill, or to deprive the President or Vice President of his/her liberty, or to eliminate the President or Vice President's ability to govern, is punishable by death or life imprisonment or a maximum of twenty years' imprisonment.

Article 105

This article is eliminated based on Law no. 1 of 1946, article VIII, point 13.

Article 106

Treason with the intention of destroying all or part of the territory of the state is punishable by life imprisonment or a maximum of twenty years' imprisonment.


Article 107

(1) Treason with the intent to overthrow the government is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.

(2) The leaders and organizers of the treason referred to in paragraph 1 shall be threatened with life imprisonment or a maximum temporary imprisonment of twenty years.

Article 108

(1) Anyone who is guilty of rebellion shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of fifteen years:

1. a person who fights against the Indonesian government with weapons;

2. people who with the intention of opposing the Indonesian Government attack together or join a group that opposes the Government with weapons.

(2) The leaders and organizers of the rebellion are threatened with life imprisonment or a maximum temporary prison sentence of twenty years.

Article 109

This article is eliminated based on S. 1930 No. 31.

Article 110

(1) Conspiracy to commit crimes according to articles 104, 106, 107 and 108 is punishable by the criminal penalties in these articles.

(2) The same penalty shall be applied to persons who, with the intent as referred to in Articles 104, 106 and 108, prepare or facilitate the commission of a crime:

1. trying to move another person to do, order someone to do or participate in doing something, in order to provide assistance when committing it or provide the opportunity, means or information to commit a crime;

2. trying to obtain the opportunity, means or information to commit a crime for oneself or another person;

3. having a stock of goods which he knows will be useful for committing a crime;

4. preparing or having a plan to carry out a crime with the aim of informing others;

5. attempting to prevent, hinder or thwart actions taken by the government to prevent or suppress the commission of crimes.


(3). The goods referred to in point 3 of the previous paragraph may be confiscated.

(4) No one will be punished if it turns out that his intention is only to prepare or facilitate changes in the state system in the general sense.

(5) If in one of the cases referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article, a crime actually occurs, the penalty may be doubled.

Article 111

(1) Anyone who establishes relations with a foreign country with the intention of inciting it to commit acts of hostility or war against the country, strengthens their intentions, promises assistance or helps prepare them to commit acts of conspiracy or war against the country, shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.

(2) If an act of hostility is committed or war occurs, the threat is the death penalty or life imprisonment or a maximum temporary prison sentence of twenty years.


Article 111 bis
(1) The maximum penalty for imprisonment of six years is:

1. Whoever establishes relations with a person or body domiciled outside Indonesia, with the intention of mobilizing that person or body to help prepare, facilitate or mobilize the overthrow of the government, to strengthen the intention of that person or body or to promise or provide assistance to that person or body or to prepare, facilitate or mobilize the overthrow of the government;


2. Whoever intends an object that can be used to provide material assistance in preparing, facilitating or carrying out the overthrow of the government, while he knows or has strong reasons to suspect that the object will be used for such an act;


3. a person who has or makes an agreement regarding an object that can be used to provide material assistance in preparing, facilitating or carrying out the overthrow of the government, while he knows or has reason to suspect that the object will be used for that act or that the object or other goods as a substitute, are intended for that purpose or are intended for that purpose by a person or object domiciled outside Indonesia.


(2) Objects which or which are related to paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 are used to commit a crime, can be confiscated.

Article 112

Anyone who intentionally publishes letters, news or information which he knows must be kept secret for the benefit of the state, or intentionally informs or gives it to a foreign country, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years.


Article 113

(1) Whoever intentionally, in whole or in part, announces, or notifies or hands over to a person who is not authorized to know, letters, maps, plans, drawings or objects of a secret nature relating to the defense or security of Indonesia against external attacks, which are in his possession or the contents, form or composition of which he knows, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years.

(2) If the documents or objects are in the possession of the guilty party, or his knowledge of them is due to his search, the punishment may be increased by one third.

Article 114

Whoever, due to his fault (negligence), causes secret letters or objects as referred to in Article 113 to be his duty to store or store them, their form or composition or all or part of them to be known to the public or controlled or known by another person (or) who is not authorized to know, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and six months or a maximum imprisonment of one year or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 115

Anyone who sees or reads letters or secret objects as referred to in Article 113, in whole or in part, while he knows or should reasonably suspect that these objects are not intended for his knowledge, and also if he makes or orders to make copies or summaries in any letters or in any language, makes or orders to make impressions, drawings or otherwise hand over these objects to a judicial official, police or civil service official, in the event that these objects are in his possession, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of three years.


Article 116

Conspiracy to commit crimes as referred to in articles 113 and 115 is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of one year.

Article 117

Anyone who does so without authority is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

1. intentionally entering an Army or Navy building, or entering a warship via a road other than a normal road;

2. intentionally entering an area, which the President or on his behalf, or the military authorities have determined to be a prohibited military area;

3. deliberately making, collecting, possessing, storing, hiding or transporting portraits or hand drawings or other information or clues regarding the area as mentioned in article 2, along with everything there.


Article 118

Anyone who, without authority, intentionally makes, collects, possesses, stores, hides or otherwise provides information regarding something related to military interests shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years or a fine of nine thousand rupiah.


Article 119

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year:

1. Whoever provides accommodation to another person, who he knows has the intention or is trying to find out secret objects as mentioned in article 113, even though he does not have the authority to do so, or has the intention or is trying to find out the location, shape, composition, weapons, supplies, machine equipment, or strength of personnel of a defense building or something else related to the interests of the army;


2. Whoever hides objects which he knows to be dangerous by any means, will be required to carry out the intention as stated in the 1st.


Article 120

If the crimes referred to in Articles 113, 115, 117, 118, 119 are committed by fraudulent means such as misleading, impersonating, using a false name or position, or by offering or accepting, imagining or promising gifts, benefits or wages in any form whatsoever, or are committed with violence or threats of violence, then the penalty for loss of liberty can be doubled.

Article 121

Anyone who is assigned by the government to negotiate with a foreign country, intentionally causing harm to the country, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years.


Article 122

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years:

1. Whoever, during a war that does not involve Indonesia, intentionally commits an act that endangers the neutrality of the state, or intentionally violates a regulation issued and announced by the government, specifically to maintain said neutrality;


2. anyone who, during wartime, deliberately violates the regulations issued and announced by the government for the safety of the country.

Article 123

An Indonesian citizen who voluntarily joins the army of a foreign country, knowing that that country is at war with Indonesia, or will face war with Indonesia, is threatened in the latter case if war breaks out, with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.


Article 124

(1) Whoever, during wartime, intentionally provides assistance to the enemy or causes harm to the country against the enemy, shall be subject to a prison sentence of fifteen years.

(2) The perpetrator is threatened with life imprisonment or a certain period or a maximum of twenty years if the perpetrator:

1. to inform or give to the enemy maps, plans, drawings or writings concerning army buildings;

2. become an enemy spy, or provide lodging to him.

(3) The death penalty or life imprisonment or a certain period of imprisonment of no more than twenty years is imposed if the perpetrator:

1. to inform or surrender to the enemy, destroy or damage any fortified or occupied place or post, any means of communication, war supply warehouse, or war treasury or of the Navy, Army or any part thereof, to obstruct, hinder or thwart any flooding or other military work planned or carried out to repel or attack;



2. causing or facilitating the emergence of unrest, rebellion or desertion among the Armed Forces.

Article 125

Conspiracy to commit a crime as referred to in Article 124 is punishable by a maximum sentence of six years.

Article 126

Anyone who, during wartime, without the intention of helping the enemy or harming the country thereby benefiting the enemy, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years, intentionally:

1. giving shelter to an enemy spy, hiding him or helping him escape;

2. to mobilize or facilitate the escape (desertion) of soldiers serving the country.

Article 127

(1) Any person who, during wartime, carries out deception in the delivery of goods needed by the Navy or Army, is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of twelve years.

(2) Anyone who is entrusted with supervising the delivery of goods and allows the deception to take place is threatened with the same penalty.

Article 128

(1) In the case of criminal punishment based on crimes under Article 104, the punishment may be revocation of rights based on Article 35 no. 1-5.

(2) In the case of criminal punishment based on crimes under Articles 106-108, 110-125, the punishment may be revocation of rights based on Article 35 no. 1-3.

(3) In the case of a criminal conviction based on a crime under Article 127, the person guilty may be prohibited from carrying out the profession he was pursuing when committing the crime, may have his rights based on Article 35 no. 1-4 revoked, and may be ordered to have the judge's decision announced.

Article 129

Criminal penalties based on the acts in articles 124-127 are applied if one of the acts is committed against or is related to an allied country in a joint war.


Chapter II

Crimes Against the Dignity of the President and Vice President
Article 130

This article is eliminated based on Law no. 1 of 1946, article VIII, point 21.

Article 131

Any attack on the president or vice president, which is not included in other, more serious criminal provisions, is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of eight years.

Article 132

This article is eliminated based on Law no. 1 of 1946, article VIII, item 23.

Article 133

This article is eliminated based on Law no. 1 of 1946, article VIII, item 23.

Article 134

Intentional insults against the President or Vice President are punishable by a maximum prison sentence of six years, or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred thousand rupiah.

Article 135

This article was removed based on Law no. 1 of 1946, article VIII, point 25.

Article 136

This article was abolished based on Law No. 1 of 1946, Article VIII, point 25. Article 136 bis The definition of insult as referred to in Article 134 also includes the formulation of actions in Article 135, if it is done outside the presence of the insulted person, either by behavior in public, or not in public, either verbally or in writing, but in front of more than four people, or in front of a third person, against his will and therefore feels offended.


Article 137

(1) Anyone who broadcasts, displays or displays in public writing or paintings containing insults against the President or Vice President, with the intention of making the contents of the insults known or more widely known to the public, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If the person guilty commits a crime while carrying out his profession, and at that time two years have not passed since the conviction became final for the same kind of crime, then he may be prohibited from carrying out said profession.


Article 138

This article is eliminated based on Law no. 1 of 1946, article VIII, item 28.

Article 139

(1) This paragraph is eliminated based on Law no. 1 of 1946, article VIII, item
29.

(2) In the case of criminal punishment based on the formulation of crimes in Article 131, the punishment may be revocation of rights based on Article 35 no. 1-4.

(3) In the case of criminal punishment based on the formulation of crimes in Article 134, the punishment may be revocation of rights based on Article 35 no. 1-3.

Chapter III - Crimes Against Friendly Countries and Against Friendly Heads of State and Their Deputies
Article 139a

Treason with the intention of releasing the territory or other areas of a friendly country in whole or in part from the power of the government in power there, is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of five years.

Article 139b

Treason with the intention of abolishing or illegally changing the form of government of a friendly country or another region is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of four years.

Article 139c

Conspiracy to commit a crime as defined in Articles 139a and 139b, is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of one year and six months.


Article 140

(1) Treason against the life or liberty of the reigning king or head of a friendly state is punishable by a maximum imprisonment of fifteen years.

(2) If the treason against life results in death or is carried out with prior planning resulting in death, the threat is the death penalty or life imprisonment or a maximum of twenty years' imprisonment. (3) If the treason against life is carried out with prior planning resulting in death, the threat is the death penalty or life imprisonment or a maximum of twenty years' imprisonment.


Article 141

Every act of attack against the reigning king or head of a friendly state, which is not included in the provisions of a more severe criminal act, is punishable by a maximum imprisonment of seven years.

Article 142

Intentional insults against a reigning king or head of a friendly state are punishable by a maximum prison sentence of five years or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred thousand rupiah.

Article 142a

Anyone who desecrates the national flag of a friendly country is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 144

(1) Anyone who broadcasts, displays or displays in public a writing or painting containing an insult to the reigning king, or the head of a friendly state, or a representative of a foreign state in Indonesia in his rank, with the intention of making the insult known or more widely known to the public, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If the person guilty of committing the crime while carrying out his profession, and at that time two years have not yet passed since there was a permanent conviction for a crime of the same kind, he may be prohibited from carrying out the profession.

Article 145

(1) In the case of criminal punishment based on the formulation of crimes in Article 140, the penalty may be revocation of rights based on Article 35 no. 1-5.

(2) In the case of criminal punishment based on the formulation of crimes in Article 141, the punishment may be revocation of rights based on Article 335 no. 1-4.

(3) In the case of criminal punishment based on the formulation of crimes in articles 139a, 139b, 139c, 142 and 143, the punishment may be revocation of rights based on article 35 no. 1-3.

Chapter IV

Crimes against carrying out state obligations and rights
Article 146

Anyone who, by violence or threat of violence, dissolves a meeting of a legislative body, government body or people's representative body, formed by or on behalf of the Government, or forces these bodies to take or not to take a decision or to take a decision or to expel the chairman or members of the meeting, shall be threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine years.


Article 147

Anyone who, by means of violence or the threat of violence, intentionally obstructs the chairman or members of a legislative body, government body or people's representative body, formed by or on behalf of the Government, from attending a meeting of said bodies, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.


Article 148

Whoever, during an election held in accordance with general regulations, intentionally, by violence or the threat of violence, prevents someone from exercising their right to vote freely and without interference, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

Article 149

(1) Whoever, when an election is held based on general regulations, by giving or promising something, bribes someone so that they do not use their right to vote or so that they use that right in a certain way, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) The same penalty applies to voters who, by accepting gifts or promises, are willing to be bribed.

Article 150

Whoever, when an election is held based on general rules, commits fraud based on general rules, commits fraud so that a voter's vote becomes worthless or causes another person other than the one designated by the voter to be elected, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine months.


Article 151

Anyone who uses another person's name to participate in an election based on general regulations is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

Article 152

Whoever, during an election held in accordance with general regulations, intentionally disrupts the voting that has been held or carries out fraudulent means that the result of the voting is different from that which should have been obtained based on the voting cards that were legally submitted or based on the votes that were legally cast, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years.


Article 153

(1) In the case of criminal punishment based on the formulation of crimes in Article 146, the punishment may be revocation of rights based on Article 35 points 1-3.

(2) In the case of criminal punishment based on the formulation of crimes in Articles 147-152, the punishment may be revocation of rights based on Article 35 point 3.

Chapter V - Crimes Against Public Order
Article 153 bis
This article is eliminated based on Law no. 1 of 1946, article 8, point 32. Article 153 ter This article was abolished based on Law no. 1 of 1946, article 8, item 32.


Article 154

Anyone who publicly expresses feelings of hostility, hatred or contempt towards the Indonesian Government shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of seven years or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 154a

Anyone who desecrates the national flag of the Republic of Indonesia and the symbol of the Republic of Indonesia shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years or a maximum fine of forty-five thousand rupiah.

Article 155

(1) Anyone who broadcasts, displays or displays writing or paintings in public which contain statements of hostility, hatred or insults towards the Indonesian Government, with the intention of making the contents known or more widely known to the public, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years and six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If the person guilty of committing the crime while carrying out his profession and at that time five years have not passed since his conviction became final for committing the same crime, the person concerned may be prohibited from carrying out the profession.

Article 156

Anyone who publicly expresses feelings of hostility, hatred or contempt towards one or several groups of the Indonesian people, shall be subject to a maximum imprisonment of four years or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah. The term "group" in this and the following articles means any part of the Indonesian people which differs from one or several other parts because of race, country of origin, religion, place, origin, descent, nationality or status according to constitutional law.

Article 156a

Any person who intentionally expresses feelings in public or commits an act: a. which is basically hostile to, abuses or blasphemes against a religion adhered to in Indonesia; b. with the intention that people do not adhere to any religion, which is based on belief in the Almighty God.


Article 157

(1) Anyone who broadcasts, displays or displays writing or paintings in public, the contents of which contain statements of feelings of hostility, hatred or insults between or against groups of the Indonesian people, with the intention that the contents become known or become more widely known to the public, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years and six months or a maximum fine of four hundred rupiah.

(2) If the person guilty of committing the crime is at the time of carrying out his profession and at that time, five years have not yet passed since his conviction became final for the same kind of crime, the person concerned may be prohibited from carrying out the profession.

Article 158

Anyone who organizes the election of members for a foreign state institution in Indonesia, or prepares or facilitates such an election, whether held in Indonesia or abroad, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years or a maximum fine of seven thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 159

Anyone who participates in general elections, whether held in Indonesia or abroad, as referred to in Article 158, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of six months or a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 160

Anyone who in public, verbally or in writing, incites to commit a criminal act, commits violence against public authorities or does not comply with the provisions of the law or official orders issued based on the provisions of the law, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of six years or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 161

(1) Anyone who broadcasts, displays or displays in public writing that incites people to commit criminal acts, opposes public authorities with violence, or opposes something else as referred to in the article

above, with the intention that the inflammatory content becomes known or becomes more widely known to the public, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If the person guilty of committing the crime while carrying out his profession and at that time five years have not yet passed since his conviction became final for the same kind of crime, the person concerned may be prohibited from carrying out the profession.

Article 161 bis
This article is eliminated based on Law no. 1 of 1946, article 8, item 34.

Article 162

Anyone who publicly offers, verbally or in writing, to provide information, an opportunity or means to commit a crime, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 163

(1) Anyone who broadcasts, displays or displays in public a writing containing an offer to provide information, an opportunity or a means to commit a crime with the intention of making the offer known or more widely known to the public, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If the person guilty of committing the crime while carrying out his profession and at that time five years have not passed since his conviction became final for such a crime, the person concerned may also be prohibited from carrying out the profession.

Article 163 bis
(1) Whoever, by using one of the means mentioned in Article 55, 2, tries to incite another person to commit a crime, and the crime or an attempt to do so which is punishable does not occur, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of six years or a maximum fine of three hundred rupiah, but with the understanding that in no case shall a heavier sentence be imposed than that which can be imposed for an attempted crime or if the attempt is not punishable for the crime itself.


(2) This rule does not apply if it does not result in a crime or attempted crime due to one's own will.

Article 164

Whoever knows that there is a conspiracy to commit a crime based on articles 104, 106, 107, and 108, 113, 115, 124, 187 or 187 bis, while there is still time to prevent the crime, and intentionally does not immediately inform the judicial or police officials or the person threatened by the crime, shall be punished if the crime is committed, with a maximum imprisonment of one year and four months or a maximum fine of three hundred rupiah.


Article 165

(1) Anyone who knows that there is an intention to commit one of the crimes based on articles 104, 106, 107, and 108, 110 - 113, and 115 - 129 and 131 or an intention to run away from the army during wartime, to desert, to murder with premeditation, to kidnap or rape or knows that there is an intention to commit the crimes mentioned in chapter 8 of this code, as long as the crime endangers the life of a person or to commit one of the crimes based on articles 224 228, 250 or one of the crimes based on articles 264 and 275 as long as it concerns a letter of credit intended for circulation, while there is still time to prevent the crime, and intentionally does not immediately inform a judicial or police official or a person threatened by the crime, shall be punished if the crime is committed, with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.



(2) This punishment is applied to a person who knows that a crime based on paragraph 1 has been committed, and has endangered the life of a person at a time when the consequences can still be prevented, and deliberately does not inform the parties mentioned in paragraph 1.

Article 166

The provisions in articles 164 and 165 do not apply to a person who, by making such notification, may incur the risk of criminal prosecution for himself, for a relative by blood or marriage in the direct or divergent line of the second or third degree, for his husband or ex-husband, or for another person who, if prosecuted, due to his position or profession, may be released as a witness against that person.


Article 167

(1) Any person who forces entry into a house, room or closed yard which is used by another person in violation of the law or is there in violation of the law, and at the request of the rightful person or his order does not leave immediately, is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of nine months or a fine of a maximum of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) Anyone who enters by damaging or climbing, using a false key, false order or false criminal clothing, or anyone who enters without the prior knowledge of the person entitled to enter and is found there at night, is deemed to have forced entry.

(3) If you make threats or use means that can frighten people, you are threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

(4) The punishment referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 may be increased by one third if the crime is committed by two or more people in association.

Article 168

(1) Anyone who forces his way into a room for public service, or is there unlawfully, and at the request of an authorized official does not leave immediately, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) Anyone who enters by damaging or climbing, using a fake key, a fake order or fake official clothing, or anyone who enters without the prior knowledge of an authorized official and not by mistake and is found there at night, is deemed to have forced entry.


(3) If he makes threats or uses means that can frighten people, he is threatened with a prison sentence of up to one year and four months.

(4) The punishment referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 may be increased by one third if the crime is committed by two or more people in association.

Article 169

(1) Participating in an association with the aim of committing a crime, or participating in other associations prohibited by general regulations, is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of six years.

(2) Participating in an association with the aim of committing an offense is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(3) For founders or managers, the penalty may be increased by one third.

Article 170

(1) Anyone who openly and with joint force uses violence against people or property shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of five years and six months.


(2) The guilty party is threatened with:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of seven years, if he intentionally destroys goods or if the violence used results in injury;

2. with a maximum prison sentence of nine years, if the violence results in serious injury; 3. with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years, if the violence results in death.

(3) Article 89 does not apply.

Article 171

This article is eliminated based on Law no. 1 of 1946, article 8, item 37.

Article 172

Anyone who intentionally disturbs the peace by making shouts or false alarms shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of three weeks or a fine of up to nine hundred rupiah.

Article 173

Anyone who, by violence or threat of violence, obstructs a permitted public meeting, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of one year.

Article 174

Anyone who intentionally disturbs a permitted public meeting by causing disturbance or making a loud noise, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of three weeks or a maximum fine of nine hundred rupiah.

Article 175

Anyone who, by violence or the threat of violence, obstructs a public and permitted religious meeting, or a permitted religious ceremony, or a burial ceremony, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of one year and four months.


Article 176

Anyone who intentionally disturbs a religious gathering which is public and permitted, or a permitted religious ceremony or a funeral ceremony, by causing disturbance or making a commotion, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of one month and two weeks or a fine of a maximum of one thousand eight hundred rupiah.


Article 177

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of one thousand eight hundred rupiah:

1. anyone who laughs at a religious official while carrying out his permitted duties;

2. Whoever insults objects for the purposes of worship in the place or place where the worship is held.

Article 178

Anyone who intentionally obstructs or hinders the permitted entry or transport of a corpse to a cemetery shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of one month and two weeks or a maximum fine of one thousand eight hundred rupiah.


Article 179

Anyone who intentionally desecrates a grave or intentionally and unlawfully destroys or damages a memorial sign at a grave site, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

Article 180

Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully digs up or takes a corpse or moves or transports a corpse that has been dug up or taken, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 181

Anyone who buries, hides, carries off or removes a corpse with the intention of concealing the death or birth, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Chapter VI - Sparring
Article 182

With a maximum prison sentence of nine months, the threat is:

(1) anyone who challenges someone to a fight or orders someone to accept the challenge, if this results in a fight;

(2) anyone who intentionally continues a challenge, if this results in a fight.

Article 183

Anyone who publicly or in front of a third party insults or mocks someone because the person concerned does not want to oppose or reject a challenge to a fight is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of six months or a maximum fine of three hundred rupiah.

Article 184

(1) A person is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine months if he does not injure his opponent in a fight.

(2) Anyone who injures the body of his opponent shall be threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

(3) Anyone who seriously injures his opponent is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years.

(4) Anyone who takes the life of his opponent is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years, or if the fight is carried out with a life or death agreement, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years.

(5) Attempted fighting is not punishable by law.

Article 185

Whoever in a fight takes the life of the opponent or injures his body, then the provisions regarding premeditated murder, murder or assault shall apply:


1. if the requirements are not set in advance;

2. if the fight is not carried out in the presence of witnesses from both parties;

3. If the perpetrator does so intentionally and harms the opposing party, he is guilty of committing fraud or deviating from the requirements.

Article 186

(1) Witnesses and doctors who attend a fight shall not be punished.

(2) The witnesses were threatened:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of three years, if the conditions are not arranged in advance, or if the witnesses incite the parties to a fight;

2. with a maximum prison sentence of four years, if the witnesses intentionally and harm one or both parties, are guilty of committing an act of fraud or allowing the parties to commit an act of fraud, or allowing deviations from the conditions;


3. The provisions regarding premeditated murder, murder or assault apply to witnesses in a fight,

where one party is deprived of his life or suffers bodily harm, if he intentionally and to the detriment of that party is guilty of committing an act of deception or allowing a deviation from the terms to the detriment of the defeated or injured party.

Chapter VII - Crimes that Endanger Public Safety of Persons or Property
Article 187

Anyone who intentionally causes a fire, explosion or flood, is threatened with:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years, if the above-mentioned act causes general danger to goods;

2. with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years, if the above-mentioned act causes danger to the life of another person; 3. with a maximum life imprisonment sentence or for a certain period of time of twenty years, if the above-mentioned act causes danger to the life of another person and results in death.

Article 187 bis
(1) Whoever makes, receives, tries to obtain, has a stock of, hides, transports or imports into Indonesia materials, objects or tools which are known or should be suspected to be intended, or if there is an opportunity will be intended, to cause an explosion which endangers the lives of people or causes general danger to property, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of eight years or a maximum imprisonment of one year.


(2) The inability of materials, objects or tools to cause an explosion, as mentioned above, does not eliminate the imposition of criminal penalties.

Article 187 ter

Conspiracy to commit one of the crimes mentioned in Articles 187 and 187 of the Criminal Code is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of five years.

Article 188 (LN 1960 - 1)
Anyone who, through negligence, causes a fire, explosion or flood, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years or a maximum imprisonment of one year or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if the act causes a general danger to property, if the act causes a danger to the life of another person, or if the act results in the death of a person.


Article 189

Anyone who, when there is or is about to be a fire, intentionally and unlawfully hides or makes unusable fire extinguishing tools or equipment or in any way hinders or obstructs the work of extinguishing the fire, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

Article 190

Whoever, when there is or will be a flood, intentionally and unlawfully hides or makes unusable materials for embankments or tools or thwarts efforts to repair embankments or irrigation structures, or obstructs efforts to prevent or hold back flooding, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years.


Article 191

Anyone who intentionally destroys, renders unusable or damages a building used to hold or channel water is liable to a maximum imprisonment of seven years if the act causes a flood hazard.

Article 191 bis
Whoever intentionally destroys, damages or makes an electrical installation unusable, or causes the operation or operation of the installation to be disrupted, or frustrates or makes it difficult to save or repair the installation, shall be punished by:


1. with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if due to this act obstacles or difficulties arise in the delivery of electricity for the public interest;


2. with a maximum prison sentence of seven years, if the act causes general danger to goods;

3. with a maximum prison sentence of nine years, if the act causes danger to the life of another person;

4. with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years, if the act causes danger to the life of another person and results in death.


Article 191 ter

Whoever, due to his fault (negligence), causes an electrical building to be destroyed, damaged or unusable or causes the operation or operation of the building to be disrupted, or efforts to save or repair the building to fail or become difficult, shall be threatened with:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum imprisonment of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if it causes obstacles or difficulties in providing electricity for the public interest or causes general danger to goods;

2. with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum imprisonment of six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if it endangers the life of another person;

3. with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum imprisonment of one year, if it results in death.

Article 192

Anyone who intentionally destroys, makes unusable or damages a building for public traffic, or obstructs a public land or water road, or thwarts efforts to secure the building or road, shall be punished by:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of nine years, if the act causes a danger to traffic safety,

2. with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years, if the act causes a danger to traffic safety and results in death.


Article 193

Whoever, due to his fault (negligence), causes a building for public traffic to be destroyed, rendered unusable or damaged, or causes a public land or water road to be obstructed, or efforts to secure the building or road to be thwarted, shall be threatened with:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum imprisonment of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if the act causes a danger to traffic safety;


2. with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum imprisonment of one year, if due to the act
resulting in death.

Article 194

(1) Anyone who intentionally creates a danger to public traffic driven by steam or other mechanical power on railways or trams, shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.

(2) If the act results in death, the guilty party is threatened with life imprisonment or imprisonment for a certain period of up to twenty years.


Article 195

(1) Anyone who, due to his fault (negligence), creates a danger to public traffic driven by steam power or other mechanical power on railways or trams, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of nine months or a maximum imprisonment of six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


(2) If the act results in death, the guilty party is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum imprisonment of one year.

Article 196

Anyone who intentionally destroys, damages, takes or moves a sign for navigational safety, or prevents its operation or installs an incorrect sign, is threatened with:


1. with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years, if the act causes a danger to the safety of navigation;

2. with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years, if the act creates a danger to the safety of navigation and results in the sinking or stranding of the ship;

3. with a life sentence or a prison sentence of a maximum of twenty years, if the act causes a danger to the safety of navigation and results in the death of a person.

Article 197

Whoever, through negligence, causes a security sign to be destroyed, damaged, taken or moved, or causes it to be installed incorrectly, shall be subject to the following penalties:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum imprisonment of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if due to this act the voyage is unsafe;


2. with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum imprisonment of six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if the incident results in the sinking or stranding of a ship,

3. with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum imprisonment of one year, if the act results in death.

Article 198

Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully sinks or beachs, destroys, renders unusable or damages a ship, shall be punished by:


1. with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years, if the act causes danger to the life of another person;

2. with a life sentence or a prison sentence for a certain period of time of no more than twenty years, if the act causes danger to the life of another person and results in death.

Article 199

Anyone who, due to his/her fault (negligence), causes a ship to sink or become stranded, be destroyed, become unusable or be damaged, is threatened with:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum imprisonment of six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if the act causes danger to other people;


2. with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum imprisonment of one year, if the act results in death.

Article 200

Anyone who intentionally destroys or damages a building or structure is threatened with:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years, if the act causes general danger to property;

2. with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years, if the act causes danger to the life of another person;

3. with a life sentence or a prison sentence for a certain period of time of no more than twenty years, if the act causes danger to the life of another person and results in death.

Article 201

Anyone who, due to his/her fault (negligence), causes a building or structure to be destroyed or damaged, is threatened with:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum imprisonment of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if the act causes general danger to goods;

2. with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum imprisonment of six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if the act causes danger to people's lives;


3. with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum imprisonment of one year if the act results in death.

Article 202

(1) Anyone who puts any object into a well, pump, source or drinking water equipment for public use or for use by or together with other people, even though he knows that because of this act the water will be dangerous for people's lives or health, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.


(2) If the act results in death, the person guilty is threatened with life imprisonment or imprisonment for a certain period of up to twenty years.


Article 203

(1) Whoever, due to his mistake (negligence), causes something to be put into a well, pump, source or drinking water equipment for the public or for use by, or together with, other people, so that because of this act the water becomes dangerous for the life or health of people, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum imprisonment of six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If the act results in death, the guilty party shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum imprisonment of one year.


Article 204

(1) Anyone who sells, offers, hands over or distributes goods which he knows are dangerous to the life or health of people, even though he is not informed of their dangerous nature, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.

(2) If the act results in death, the person guilty is threatened with life imprisonment or imprisonment for a certain period of up to twenty years.


Article 205

(1) Anyone who, due to his/her mistake (negligence), causes goods which are dangerous to the life or health of people to be sold, handed over or distributed without the purchaser or acquirer knowing their dangerous nature, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum imprisonment of six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If the act results in death, the guilty party shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum imprisonment of one year.


(3) The goods may be confiscated.

Article 206

(1) In the case of conviction for one of the crimes under this chapter, the guilty party may be prohibited from carrying out his profession when committing the crime.

(2) In the case of a conviction based on one of the crimes in Articles 204 and 205, the judge may order that the verdict be announced.

Chapter VIII - Crimes Against Public Authority
Article 207

Anyone who intentionally, in public, verbally or in writing, insults a ruler or public authority in Indonesia, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of one year and six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 208

(1) Anyone who broadcasts, displays or displays in public a writing or painting containing insults against the authorities or public bodies in Indonesia with the intention of making the insulting content known or more widely known to the public, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If the person guilty of committing the crime in his profession and at that time two years have not yet passed since the conviction became final for the same kind of crime, then the person concerned may be prohibited from carrying out the profession.


Article 209

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah:

1. anyone who gives or promises something to an official with the intention of encouraging him to do or not do something in his position that is contrary to his obligations;


2. Anyone who gives something to an official because of or in connection with something that is contrary to his/her obligations, whether done or not done in his/her position. The revocation of the rights referred to in Article 35 No. 1-4 may be imposed.

Article 210

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years:

1. anyone who gives or promises something to a judge with the intention of influencing the decision on a case submitted to him for trial;

2. Any person who gives or promises something to a person who according to the provisions of the law is determined to be an advisor or advisor to attend a trial or court, with the intention of influencing the advice or opinion that will be given in connection with a case submitted to the court for trial.


(2) If the gift or promise is made with the intention of being punished in a criminal case, the guilty party shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine years.


(3) Revocation of rights based on Article 35 No. 1-4 may be imposed.

Article 211

Anyone who, by violence or threat of violence, forces an official to carry out official acts or to refrain from carrying out legitimate official acts, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years.

Article 212

Anyone who uses violence or the threat of violence to resist an official who is carrying out a legitimate duty, or a person who, according to a statutory obligation or at the request of an official, provides assistance to him, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 213

Coercion and resistance under articles 211 and 212 are threatened:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of five years, if the crime or other act at that time results in injury;

2. with a maximum prison sentence of eight years and six months, if it results in serious injury;

3. with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years if it results in death.

Article 214

(1) Coercion and resistance based on articles 211 and 212 if carried out by two or more people in association, are punishable by a maximum prison sentence of seven years.


(2) The guilty party shall be subject to:

1. a maximum prison sentence of eight years and six months, if the crime or other act at that time results in injury;

2. a maximum prison sentence of twelve years, if it results in serious injury;

3. a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years, if it results in death.


Article 215

Equated with officials in articles 211 - 214:

1. a person who, according to the provisions of the law, is continuously or temporarily entrusted with carrying out a public office;

2. administrators and sworn employees as well as workers in railway and tram services for general traffic, where transportation is carried out by steam or other engines.

Article 216

(1) Whoever intentionally does not comply with an order or request made according to law by an official whose duty is to supervise something, or by an official based on his duties, who is also given the authority to investigate or examine a criminal act; likewise whoever intentionally prevents, obstructs or thwarts an action to carry out the provisions of law carried out by one of the officials, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of nine thousand rupiah.

(2) Equated with the criminals mentioned above, any person who, according to the provisions of the law, is continuously or temporarily entrusted with the task of carrying out a public office.

(3) If at the time of committing the crime it has not been two years since the conviction became final for a crime of the same kind, then the sentence may be increased by one third.

Article 217

Anyone who causes a disturbance in a court session or in a place where an official is carrying out his legitimate duties in public, and does not leave after being ordered by or on behalf of the competent authority, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of three weeks or a maximum fine of one thousand eight hundred rupiah.


Article 218

Anyone who, when people gather in a crowd, intentionally does not immediately leave after being ordered to do so three times by or on behalf of the authorized authority, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of nine thousand rupiah for participating in a group.

Article 219

Any person who unlawfully tears, renders unreadable or damages a proclamation issued in the name of an authorized authority or in accordance with the provisions of law, with the intention of preventing or making it difficult for people to know the contents of the proclamation, is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of one month and two weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 220

Anyone who reports or reports that a criminal act has been committed, even though he knows that it has not been committed, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

Article 221

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah:

1. anyone who intentionally hides a person who has committed a crime or who is being prosecuted for a crime, or anyone who provides assistance to him to avoid investigation or detention by the judiciary or the police, or by another person who, according to the provisions of the law, is continuously or temporarily entrusted with carrying out police duties;

2. Whoever, after committing a crime and with the intention of covering it up, or to obstruct or complicate the investigation or prosecution, destroys, removes, hides objects on or with which the crime was committed or other traces of the crime, or withdraws them from examination by judicial or police officials or by other persons who, according to the provisions of the law, are continuously or temporarily entrusted with carrying out police duties.



(2) The above rules do not apply to people who commit such acts with the intention of avoiding or warding off the danger of prosecution against a relative by blood or marriage in a direct line or in a second or third degree deviant line, or against their husband/wife or ex-husband/wife.

Article 222

Anyone who intentionally prevents, obstructs or thwarts a forensic examination of a corpse shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 223

Anyone who intentionally releases or provides assistance in escaping to a person who is detained on the orders of a public authority, based on a judge's decision or decree, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.

Article 224

Anyone who is summoned as a witness, expert or interpreter according to the law and intentionally does not fulfill the obligations under the law that he must fulfill, is threatened with:

1. in criminal cases, with a maximum prison sentence of nine months;


2. in other cases, with a maximum prison sentence of six months.

Article 225

Anyone who intentionally fails to comply with a legal order to submit documents which are considered to be false or falsified, or which must be used to compare with other documents which are considered to be false or falsified or whose truth is denied or not acknowledged, shall be threatened with:

1. in criminal cases, with a maximum prison sentence of nine months;


2. in other cases, with a maximum prison sentence of six months;

Article 226

Anyone who is declared bankrupt or in a state of incapacity or as the husband/wife of a bankrupt person in a marriage with a community of assets or as a manager or commissioner of a company, association or foundation declared bankrupt, and is summoned based on the provisions of the law to provide information, intentionally does not appear without a valid reason, or is reluctant to provide the information requested or intentionally provides false information, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

Article 227

Anyone who exercises a right, even though he knows that by a judge's decision that right has been revoked, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of nine hundred rupiah.

Article 228

Anyone who intentionally uses a rank insignia or carries out an act which is part of a position which he does not hold or from which he has been temporarily suspended, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 229

Anyone who intentionally uses a badge of honour relating to a rank or title which he does not possess shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 230

This article was abolished based on Law No.1 of 1946 article 8, point 41.

Article 231

(1) Anyone who intentionally withdraws an item that has been confiscated based on statutory provisions or that has been deposited on the order of a judge, or knowing that the item has been withdrawn from there, hides it, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years.

(2) Anyone who intentionally destroys, damages or renders unusable goods confiscated under the provisions of the law is subject to the same penalty.


(3) A person who deliberately carries out or allows one of these crimes to be carried out, or acts as an accomplice in assisting in such an act, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years.

(4) If one of the acts is committed due to the negligence of the person storing the goods, the penalty is imprisonment for a maximum of one month or a fine of a maximum of one thousand eight hundred rupiah.

Article 232

(1) Anyone who intentionally breaks, removes or damages the sealing of an object by or on behalf of an authorized public authority, or in any other way thwarts the sealing with a seal, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.


(2) A person who deliberately carries out or allows such an act, or acts as an accomplice in assisting in such an act, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years.

(3) If the act is committed due to the negligence of the person storing the goods, the penalty is imprisonment for a maximum of one month or a fine of a maximum of one thousand eight hundred rupiah.

Article 233

Whoever intentionally destroys, damages, makes unusable, removes items used to convince or prove something before the competent authority, deeds, letters or lists which, by order of the public authority, are continuously or temporarily kept, or handed over to an official, or to another person for the public interest, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years.


Article 234

Anyone who intentionally removes from his address, opens or damages a letter or other item handed over to a post office or telegram office, or which has been placed in a post box or entrusted to a letter carrier, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

Article 235

If the person guilty of committing one of the crimes under Articles 231 - 234, enters the place of crime by breaking into, damaging or climbing, using a fake key, a fake order or fake official clothing, the penalty may be doubled.


Article 236

Whoever in peacetime, using one of the methods based on Article 55 No. 2, intentionally encourages a member of the military in state service to escape, or facilitates this by using one of the methods based on Article 56, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine months.

Article 237

Whoever, in times of peace, by using one of the methods referred to in Article 55 No. 2, intentionally encourages unrest or rebellion among members of the Armed Forces in State service or facilitates it in a way referred to in Article 56, shall be subject to a maximum imprisonment of seven years.


Article 238

Anyone who, without the President's approval, invites someone to join the army of a foreign country, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 239

Anyone who, without the President's approval, invites an Indonesian citizen to work outside Indonesia or to demonstrate outside Indonesia the proper way of life of the Indonesian people, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 240

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months:

1. Whoever intentionally makes or orders to make himself unable to fulfill his obligations based on Article 30 of the Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia:

2. Anyone who, at the request of another person, intentionally makes that person unable to fulfill said obligation.

(2) If the final act results in death, the perpetrator is subject to a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

Article 241

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah:

1. abolished based on LN 1955 - 28;

2. Any person who is transporting livestock who is required to wear a delivery pass, when transporting intentionally uses the pass given to other livestock, as if it were given to the person being transported.

Chapter IX - False Oaths and False Statements
Article 242

(1) Whoever, in a situation where the law requires giving a statement under oath or creating legal consequences for such statement, intentionally gives false information under oath, either orally or in writing, personally or by a proxy specifically appointed for that purpose, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of seven years.


(2) If false testimony under oath is given in a criminal case and is detrimental to the defendant or suspect, the person guilty shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine years.

(3) Equated with an oath is a promise or affirmation that is required according to general rules or that is a substitute for an oath.

(4) Criminal penalties for revocation of rights based on Article 35 No. 1 - 4 may be imposed.

Article 243

Abolished based on Stbl. 1931 No. 240.

Chapter X - Counterfeiting of Currency and Banknotes
Article 244

Anyone who imitates or counterfeits currency or paper issued by the State or Bank, with the intention of circulating or ordering the circulation of said currency or paper money as genuine and not counterfeit, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.

Article 245

Anyone who intentionally circulates currency or banknotes issued by the State or Bank as genuine and uncounterfeited currency or banknotes, even though they have been imitated or counterfeited by themselves, or when they are received they are known to be not genuine or counterfeited, or anyone who keeps or imports such currency and banknotes into Indonesia, with the intention of circulating or ordering them to be circulated as genuine and uncounterfeited money, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.

Article 246

Anyone who reduces the value of currency with the intention of issuing or ordering the circulation of the reduced value of money, is threatened with damage to money with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years.

Article 247

Anyone who intentionally circulates currency that has been reduced in value by himself or who damages it when it is received, is known to be undamaged money, or anyone who stores or imports such money into Indonesia

with the intention of distributing or ordering it to be distributed as undamaged money, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of twelve years.

Article 248

Abolished based on Stbl. 1938 No. 593.

Article 249

Anyone who intentionally distributes currency that is not genuine, counterfeit or damaged or counterfeit State or Bank banknotes, shall be threatened, except under articles 245 and 247, with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 250

Anyone who makes or has a stock of materials or objects which he knows will be used to imitate, counterfeit or reduce the value of currency, or to imitate or counterfeit state or bank notes, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of six years or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 250 bis
Punishment based on one of the crimes described in this chapter: counterfeit, falsified or damaged currency, counterfeit or falsified State or Bank banknotes, materials or objects which by their nature are used to imitate, falsify or reduce the value of currency or banknotes, as long as they are used for or become objects in committing a crime, shall be confiscated, even if the items do not belong to the convict.


Article 251

Anyone who intentionally and without the permission of the Government, keeps or imports into Indonesia silver coins or sheets, whether or not stamped or lightly worked, may be threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of one year or a fine of up to ten thousand rupiah, even though they are not clearly intended to be used as jewelry or commemorative signs.


Article 252

In the case of criminal conviction based on one of the crimes described in Articles 244 - 247, the rights as referred to in Article 35 No. 1 - 4 may be revoked.


Chapter XI - Counterfeiting of Stamps and Trademarks

Article 253

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years:

1. anyone who imitates or forges a stamp issued by the Indonesian Government, or if a signature is required for the validity of the stamp, anyone who imitates or forges a signature, with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the stamp as a genuine and unfalsified or valid stamp;

2. Whoever, with the same intention, makes the stamp using the original stamp in an unlawful manner.

Article 254

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of six years:

1. anyone who affixes gold or silver goods with a counterfeit State mark, or with a counterfeit statutory mark of expertise or counterfeits an original mark or mark with the intention of using or ordering another person to use it as if the mark or mark were genuine and not counterfeit;

2. Anyone who, with the same intention, affixes said goods with a brand or mark, using an original stamp unlawfully;


3. Whoever gives, adds or transfers an original State trademark or original statutory mark of expertise to gold or silver goods other than those to which the trademark or mark was originally affixed, with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the goods as if the trademark or mark had originally been affixed to the goods.


Article 255

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years:

1. anyone who affixes goods which must be calibrated or which at the request of the interested party are permitted to be calibrated or recalibrated with a fake Indonesian calibrated mark, or anyone who falsifies a genuine calibrated mark, with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the goods as if the calibrated mark were genuine and not falsified;


2. Anyone who, with the same intention, affixes a brand to the goods using an original stamp in an unlawful manner;


3, anyone who gives, adds or transfers an original Indonesian label to an item other than the one originally marked

that is, with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the item as if the mark had originally been placed on the item.


Article 256

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of three years:

1. anyone who affixes a brand other than those mentioned in articles 254 and 255, which according to the provisions of the law must or may be affixed to goods or their packaging in a false manner to the goods or packaging, with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the goods as if the brand were genuine and not counterfeited;


2. anyone who with the same intention affixes a brand to goods or their packaging using an original stamp in an unlawful manner;


3. Anyone who uses an original brand for goods or their packaging, even though the brand is not for those goods or their packaging, with the intention of using or ordering someone else to use those goods as if the brand was designated for those goods.

Article 257

Whoever intentionally uses, sells, offers, delivers, has stock for sale, or imports into Indonesia, stamps, signs or brands that are not genuine, counterfeit or made illegally, or objects on which the mark is affixed illegally as if the stamp, sign or brand were genuine, not counterfeit and not made illegally, or not affixed illegally to the objects, is threatened with imprisonment the same as that stipulated in articles 253 - 256, according to the differences stipulated in those articles.



Article 258

(1) Anyone who falsifies measurements or measures, weights or scales after they have been marked with a calibration mark, with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the goods as if they were genuine and not falsified, shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of three years.


(2) Anyone who intentionally uses falsified measurements or weights, weights or scales, as if the goods were genuine and not falsified, shall be punished with the same penalty.

Article 259

(1) Anyone who removes the discard mark from a labeled item with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the item as if it had not been discarded, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

(2) Anyone who intentionally uses, sells, offers, hands over or has in stock for sale an item from which the discarded mark has been removed as if the item had not been discarded shall be punished with the same penalty.

Article 260

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah:

1. Whoever removes the stamp from an Indonesian Government stamp which has been used, the purpose of which is to prevent its further use, with the intention of using it or ordering someone else to use it, as if the stamp had not been used;

2. Whoever removes from the Indonesian Government stamps which have been used, with the same intention, the signature, mark or sign when used, which according to the provisions of the law must be affixed on or on the stamps.

(2) Anyone who intentionally uses, sells, offers, hands over, has stock for sale or imports into Indonesia stamps whose stamp, signature, characteristics or markings when used have been removed, as if the stamp had not been used.


Article 260 bis
(1) The provisions in articles 253, 256, 257 and 260 also apply according to the differences specified in those articles, if the actions described therein are committed against a seal or brand used by the Indonesian Postal Service or a foreign country.


(2) If a crime is committed against a seal or brand used by a foreign country's postal service, the maximum principal penalty determined for the crime is reduced by one third.

Article 261

(1) Anyone who stores materials or objects which he knows are intended to commit one of the crimes described in Article 253 or Article 260 bis, in connection with Article 253, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) The materials and goods are confiscated.

Article 262

In the case of criminal punishment based on one of the crimes described in Articles 253
- 260 bis, the rights as referred to in Article 35 No. 1 - 4 may be revoked.


Chapter XII - Forgery of Letters

Article 263

(1) Anyone who makes a false letter or falsifies a letter which can give rise to a right, obligation or release from debt, or which is intended as evidence of something with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the letter as if its contents were true and not falsified, is threatened if the use can cause a loss, due to the falsification of the letter, with a maximum prison sentence of six years.


(2) Anyone who intentionally uses a fake or falsified letter as if it were genuine, if the use of the letter can cause loss, shall be subject to the same penalty.


Article 264

(1) Forgery of documents is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of eight years, if committed against:

l. authentic deeds;

2. a debt letter or debt certificate from a country or part thereof or from a public institution;

3. letter of ownership or debt or certificate of ownership or debt from an association, foundation, company or airline:

4. talon, proof of dividends or interest from one of the letters described in 2 and 3, or proof issued in lieu of those letters;


5. letter of credit or trade letter intended for circulation.

(2) Anyone who intentionally uses the letter referred to in the first paragraph, the contents of which are not true or which are falsified as if they were true and not falsified, shall be subject to the same penalty, if the falsification of the letter can cause loss.

Article 265

Abolished based on Stbl. 1926. No. 359 jo. No. 429.

Article 266

(1) Anyone who orders the insertion of false information into an authentic deed regarding something the truth of which must be stated in the deed, with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the deed as if the information were in accordance with the truth, shall be threatened, if the use can cause harm, with a maximum prison sentence of seven years;

(2) Anyone who intentionally uses the letter referred to in the first paragraph, the contents of which are not true or which are falsified as if they were true and not falsified, shall be subject to the same penalty, if the falsification of the letter can cause loss.

Article 267

(1) A doctor who intentionally provides a false certificate regarding the presence or absence of disease, weakness or disability, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years.

(2) If information is given with the intention of putting someone in a mental hospital or detaining them there, a maximum prison sentence of eight years and six months shall be imposed.

(3) Anyone who intentionally uses a false certificate as if its contents were true shall be subject to the same penalty.

Article 268

(1) Anyone who makes or falsifies a doctor's certificate regarding the presence or absence of illness, weakness or disability, with the intention of misleading the public authority or insurer, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years.


(2) Anyone who, with the same intent, uses a false or falsified certificate as if the certificate were true and not falsified shall be subject to the same penalty.


Article 269

(1) Anyone who makes a false letter or falsifies a certificate of good conduct, competence, poverty, disability or other condition, with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the letter in order to be accepted for work or in order to obtain generosity and assistance, shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

(2) Anyone who intentionally uses a false or falsified certificate as referred to in the first paragraph, as if the certificate were genuine and not falsified, shall be subject to the same penalty.

Article 270

(1) Anyone who makes a false letter or falsifies a travel pass or replacement letter, security card, travel order or letter given according to the provisions of the law regarding granting permission to foreigners to enter and reside in Indonesia, or anyone who orders the issuance of a similar letter under a false name or a false nickname or by referring to a false condition, with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the letter as if it were genuine and not falsified or as if its contents were in accordance with the truth, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.

(2) Anyone who intentionally uses a false or falsified letter as referred to in the first paragraph, as if it were true and not falsified or as if its contents were in accordance with the truth, shall be punished with the same penalty.

Article 271

(1) Anyone who makes a fake or falsifies a letter of introduction for buffalo or cows, or orders a similar letter to be given in a false name or by referring to false circumstances, with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the letter as if its contents were in accordance with the truth, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.

(2) Anyone who intentionally uses a fake or falsified letter as referred to in the first paragraph, as if it were genuine and not falsified or as if its contents were in accordance with the truth, shall be punished with the same penalty.

Article 272

Abolished based on S. 1926 No. 359 jo. No. 429.

Article 273

Abolished based on S. 1926 No. 359 jo. No. 429.

Article 274

(1) Anyone who makes a fake or falsifies a certificate from an official as the legitimate authority, regarding ownership rights or other rights to an item, with the intention of facilitating its sale or pawning or to mislead a judicial or police official about its origin, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years.


(2) Anyone who, with the aforementioned intent, uses the certificate as if it were genuine and not falsified shall be subject to the same penalty.

Article 275

(1) Anyone who stores materials or objects which he knows are intended to commit one of the crimes under Article 264 No. 2 - 5,

shall be punished with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) The materials and objects are confiscated.

Article 276

In the case of criminal conviction based on one of the crimes in Articles 263 - 268, revocation of rights based on Article 35 No. 1 - 4 may be imposed.

Chapter XIII - Crimes Against Origin and Marriage
Article 277

(1) Anyone who intentionally obscures the origins of a person by any act shall be punished for obscuring origins by a maximum prison sentence of six years.

(2) Revocation of rights based on Article 35 No. 1 - 4 can be declared.

Article 278

Anyone who acknowledges a child as his/her own according to the provisions of the Civil Code, even though he/she knows that he/she is not the father of the child, is threatened with committing false child recognition with a maximum prison sentence of three years.

Article 279

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years:

1. anyone who enters into a marriage knowing that his or her existing marriage or marriages constitute a legal obstacle to that;


2. Anyone who enters into a marriage knowing that the marriage or marriages of another party are an obstacle to that.


(2) If the person committing the act based on paragraph 1 point 1 conceals from the other party that the existing marriage is a legal barrier to this, he/she shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

(3) Revocation of rights based on Articles No. 1 – 5 may be declared.

Article 280

Anyone who enters into a marriage, but intentionally does not inform the other party that there is a legal obstacle, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence.

five years later, if then based on these obstacles, the marriage is declared invalid.

Chapter XIV - Crimes Against Decency
Article 281

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah:

1. anyone who intentionally and openly violates morality;

2. Any person who intentionally and in front of other people is there against his will, violates decency

Article 282

(1) Whoever broadcasts, displays or displays in public a writing, picture or object whose contents are known to violate morality, or whoever, with the intention of broadcasting, displaying or displaying in public, makes such writing, picture or object, imports it into the country, forwards it, takes it out of the country, or has a stock of it, or whoever openly or by distributing letters without being asked, offers it or displays it as being available for acquisition, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of one year and six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.



(2) Whoever broadcasts, displays or displays in public a writing, picture or object that violates morality, or whoever with the intention of broadcasting, displaying or displaying in public, makes, imports into the country, forwards, exports from the country, or has a stock of it, or whoever openly or by distributing a letter without being asked, offers or indicates that it can be obtained, shall be threatened, if there is a strong reason for him to suspect that the writing, picture or object violates morality, with a maximum imprisonment of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


(3) If the person guilty of committing the crime mentioned in the first paragraph as a profession or habit, he may be sentenced to a maximum of two years and eight months in prison or a maximum fine of seventy-five thousand rupiah.

Article 283

(1) Anyone who offers, gives permanently or temporarily, hands over or shows writing, pictures or objects that violate morality, or tools to prevent or terminate pregnancy to a minor, and who is known to be a minor, shall be punished with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of nine thousand rupiah.

or it should be assumed that the person is generally under seventeen years of age, if the contents of the writing, picture, object or tool are known to him.

(2) Anyone who reads out the contents of a text that violates morality in front of a minor as referred to in the previous paragraph, if the contents are known to him, shall be punished.

(3) Anyone who offers, gives permanently or temporarily, hands over or shows writing, pictures or objects that violate morality, or tools to prevent or terminate pregnancy to a minor as referred to in the first paragraph, if there is a strong reason for him to suspect that the writing, picture or object that violates morality or the tool is a tool to prevent or terminate pregnancy.





Article 283 bis
If the person guilty of committing one of the crimes mentioned in Articles 282 and 283 in carrying out his profession and at that time two years have not yet passed since the conviction which has become certain for the same crime, then his right to carry out said profession may be revoked.

Article 284

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine months:

He is a married man who commits gendak (overspel), even though it is known that Article 27 of the Civil Code applies to him,

b. a married woman who commits fornication, even though it is known that Article 27 of the Civil Code applies to her;

2. a. a man who participates in the act, even though he knows that the other person is married;

b. a married woman who participates in committing the act, even though she knows that the person who is also guilty is married and Article 27 BW applies to her.

(2) Prosecution will not be carried out except upon a complaint from the husband/wife who is being sullied, and if Article 27 of the Civil Code applies to them, within a period of three months this will be followed by a request for divorce or separation from bed and board for that reason as well.

(3) Articles 72, 73 and 75 do not apply to this complaint.

(4) A complaint may be withdrawn as long as the examination in the court hearing has not yet begun.

(5) If Article 27 of the Civil Code applies to a husband and wife, complaints will not be heeded as long as the marriage has not been decided due to divorce or before the decision stating that there is a separation between bed and board becomes permanent.

Article 285

Anyone who uses violence or the threat of violence to force a woman to have sexual intercourse with him outside of marriage is threatened with rape and is subject to a maximum prison sentence of twelve years.

Article 286

Anyone who has sexual intercourse with a woman outside of marriage, knowing that the woman is unconscious or helpless, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine years.

Article 287

(1) Anyone who has sexual intercourse with a woman outside of marriage, even though he knows or should suspect that she is not yet fifteen years old, or if her age is not clear, that she is not yet marriageable, shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of nine years.

(2) Prosecution is only carried out on complaint, except if the woman is not yet twelve years old or if there is one of the things based on Article 291 and Article 294.

Article 288

(1) Whoever in marriage has sexual intercourse with a woman who he knows or should reasonably suspect is not yet ready to marry, if the act results in injury, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of four years.


(2) If the act results in serious injury, the penalty is a maximum of eight years' imprisonment.

(3) If it results in death, a maximum prison sentence of twelve years shall be imposed.

Article 289

Anyone who, by using violence or the threat of violence, forces someone to commit or allow an obscene act to be committed, is threatened with committing an act that attacks moral honor, with a maximum prison sentence of nine years.


Article 290

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years:

1. anyone who commits an indecent act with someone, even though he knows that the person is unconscious or helpless;

2. Whoever commits an indecent act with a person who he knows or should reasonably suspect is under fifteen years of age or, if the age is not clear, that the person concerned is not yet of marriageable age:


3. Whoever persuades someone who he knows or should reasonably suspect is under fifteen years of age or if it is not clear that the person concerned is not yet of marriageable age, to commit or allow an obscene act to be committed, or to have sexual intercourse outside of marriage with another person.

Article 291

(1) If one of the crimes under Articles 286, 287, 289 and 290 results in serious injury, a maximum prison sentence of twelve years is imposed; (2) If one of the crimes under Articles 285, 286, 287, 289 and 290 results in death, a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years is imposed.

Article 292

An adult who commits an indecent act with a person of the same sex, whom he knows or should reasonably suspect to be a minor, is subject to a maximum prison sentence of five years.

Article 293

(1) Whoever, by giving or promising money or goods, misuses the bearer of the power arising from a relationship of circumstances, or by misleading someone intentionally induces a minor of good conduct to commit or allow an obscene act to be committed with him, even though he knows or should reasonably suspect that he is not yet mature, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of five years.


(2) Prosecution is only carried out upon a complaint from the person against whom the crime was committed.

(3) The time limits referred to in Article 74 for this complaint are nine months and twelve months respectively.

Article 294

(1) Any person who commits an obscene act with his child, step-child, adopted child, child under his care who is not yet an adult, or with a minor whose care, education or care he or she is not yet an adult, is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of seven years.

(2) Threatened with the same penalty:

1. an official who commits obscene acts with a person who by virtue of his position is his subordinate, or with a person whose care is entrusted or handed over to him,

2. administrators, doctors, teachers, employees, supervisors or orderlies in prisons, state work places, places of education, orphanages, hospitals, mental hospitals or social institutions, who commit obscene acts with people who are put there.

Article 295


(1) Threatened:



1. with a maximum imprisonment of five years for anyone who intentionally causes or facilitates the commission of obscene acts by his child, stepchild, adopted child, or child under his supervision who is not yet an adult, or by a minor whose maintenance, education or care is entrusted to him, or by his servant or subordinate who is not yet of age, with another person;



2. with a maximum prison sentence of four years, anyone who intentionally connects or facilitates obscene acts, except those mentioned in point 1 above, committed by a person who is known to be a minor or who should reasonably be suspected of being such, with another person.

(2) If the perpetrator commits the crime as a profession or habit, then the sentence can be increased by one third.

Article 296

Anyone who intentionally causes or facilitates the crime of one person with another person, and makes it a profession or habit, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum fine of fifteen thousand rupiah.

Article 297

Trafficking of women and trafficking of underage boys is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of six years.

Article 298

(1) In the case of criminal conviction based on one of the crimes in Articles 281, 284 - 290 and 292 - 297, the revocation of rights based on Article 35 No. 1 - 5 may be declared.

(2) If the person guilty of committing one of the crimes under Articles 292 - 297 in carrying out his search, then the right to carry out that search may be revoked.

Article 299

(1) Anyone who intentionally treats a woman or orders her to be treated, by informing her or raising the expectation that the treatment will result in her pregnancy being terminated, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of four years or a maximum fine of forty-five thousand rupiah.

(2) If the guilty person does so to seek profit, or makes the act a pursuit or habit, or if he is a healer, midwife or interpreter, the penalty may be increased by one third.


(3) If the person guilty of committing the crime in carrying out his profession, his right to carry out that profession may be revoked.

Article 300

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah:

1. Anyone who intentionally sells or gives intoxicating drinks to someone who appears to be drunk; trafficking in women and trafficking in underage boys, is subject to a maximum prison sentence of six years.


2. anyone who intentionally makes a child under sixteen years of age drunk;

3. Anyone who uses violence or the threat of violence to force someone to drink an intoxicating drink. (2) If the act results in serious injury, the person guilty shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

(3) If the act results in death, the guilty party is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine years.

(4) If the person guilty of committing the crime in carrying out his profession, his right to carry out that profession may be revoked.

Article 301

Whoever gives or hands over to another person a child who is under his legal authority and who is generally less than twelve years old, even though it is known that the child will be used for or during begging or for dangerous work, or work that could damage his health, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years.

Article 302

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah for committing minor animal abuse:


1. anyone who, without proper purpose or excessively, intentionally hurts or injures an animal or harms its health;


2. anyone who, without a proper aim or by going beyond the limits necessary to achieve that aim, deliberately does not provide food necessary for life to animals, which wholly or partly belong to him and are under his supervision, or to animals which he is obliged to care for.

(2) If the act results in illness for more than a week, or disability or other serious injuries, or death, the guilty party is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine months, or a maximum fine of three hundred rupiah, for animal abuse.


(3) If the animal belongs to the guilty party, then the animal can be confiscated.

(4) Attempting to commit the crime is not punishable.

Article 303

(1) Anyone who, without obtaining permission: shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of ten years or a maximum fine of twenty-five million rupiah.

1. deliberately offering or providing opportunities for gambling games and making it a pursuit, or deliberately participating in an enterprise for that purpose;

2. intentionally offering or giving the public the opportunity to gamble or intentionally participating in an enterprise for that purpose, without regard to whether there are any conditions or procedures required to use the opportunity;


3. Take part in the 'udi game as a pen

(2) If the person guilty of committing the crime while carrying out his/her profession, his/her right to carry out that profession may be revoked.

(3) What is meant by gambling is any game, where in general the possibility of making a profit depends solely on luck, or because the player is more trained or more skilled. This includes all bets on

decisions of competitions or other games that are not held between those who participate in the competition or play, as well as all other bets.

Article 303 bis
(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years or a maximum fine of ten million rupiah:

1. anyone who uses the opportunity to gamble, which is held in violation of the provisions of Article 303;

2. Anyone who participates in gambling on a public road or on the side of a public road or in a place that can be visited by the public, unless there is permission from the competent authority who has given permission to hold the gambling.

(2) If, when committing an offense, two years have not passed since a criminal conviction became final due to one of these offenses, the person may be subject to a maximum prison sentence of six years or a maximum fine of fifteen million rupiah.
Chapter XV - Leaving People Who Need Help
Article 304

Anyone who intentionally places or allows someone to be in a state of misery, even though according to the law applicable to him or because of an agreement he is obliged to provide life, care or maintenance to that person, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 305

Anyone who places a child under seven years of age to be found or abandons the child with the intention of freeing himself from him, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years and six months.

Article 306

(1) If one of the acts based on articles 304 and 305 results in serious injury, the guilty party shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of seven years and six months.


(2) If it results in death, the maximum prison sentence is nine years.

Article 307

If the person who commits the crime under Article 305 is the father or mother of the child, then the punishment stipulated in Articles 305 and 306 can be increased by one third.

Article 308

If a mother, fearing that her child will be found out about, places her child there soon after giving birth or abandons it with the intention of getting away from it, then the maximum penalty in articles 305 and 306 is reduced by half.


Article 309

In the case of criminal conviction based on one of the crimes in Articles 304 - 308, the rights referred to in Article 35 No. 4 may be revoked.

Chapter XVI - Insult
Article 310

(1) Anyone who intentionally attacks the honor or good name of someone by accusing them of something, with the clear intention of making it public knowledge, is threatened with defamation with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If this is done in writing or images that are broadcast, shown or posted in public, then the penalty for written defamation is a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


(3) It does not constitute defamation or written defamation if the act is clearly carried out in the public interest or because of necessity to defend oneself.

Article 311

(1) If the person who commits the crime of defamation or written defamation is allowed to prove that what is alleged is true, does not prove it, and the accusation is made contrary to what is known, then he is threatened with committing defamation with a maximum prison sentence of four years.

(2) Revocation of rights based on Article 35 No. 1 - 3 may be imposed.

Article 312

Proof of the truth of the accusation is only permitted in the following cases:

1. if the judge deems it necessary to examine the truth in order to consider the defendant's statement, that the act was committed in the public interest, or because he was forced to defend himself;

2. if an official is accused of something in carrying out his duties.

Article 313

The evidence referred to in Article 312 is not permitted if the matter alleged can only be prosecuted based on a complaint and the complaint is not submitted.

Article 314

(1) If the person who was insulted is found guilty of the thing accused by a final judge's decision, then criminal prosecution for slander is not possible.

(2) If he is acquitted of the accused by a final judge's decision, then that decision is seen as perfect proof that the accused is not true.


(3) If criminal prosecution has been initiated against the person who has been insulted because of the thing he is accused of, then the prosecution for slander will be stopped until a final decision is received regarding the thing accused.

Article 315

Every deliberate insult which is not in the nature of defamation or written libel which is committed against a person, either in public orally or in writing, or in front of that person himself orally or in action, or in a letter sent or received by him, is punishable as a minor insult with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 316

The penalty specified in the previous articles in this chapter may be increased by one third if the person insulted is an official while or because of carrying out his legitimate duties.

Article 317

(1) Anyone who intentionally submits a false complaint or notification to the authorities, either in writing or to be written, about a person so that his honor or good name is attacked, is threatened with making a slanderous complaint, with a maximum prison sentence of four years.

(2) Revocation of rights based on Article 35 No. 1 - 3 may be imposed.

Article 318

(1) Any person who by any act deliberately creates a false suspicion against someone that he has committed a criminal act, is threatened, for giving rise to a false suspicion, with a maximum imprisonment of four years.

(2) Revocation of rights based on Article 35 No. 1 - 3 may be imposed.

Article 319 Insults that are punishable by law according to this chapter, shall not be prosecuted if there is no complaint from the person affected by the crime, except under Article 316.


Article 320

(1) Anyone who commits an act against a deceased person which, if the person were still alive, would constitute defamation or written defamation, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) This crime will not be prosecuted if there is no complaint from a blood relative or in-law in a direct or divergent line up to the second degree from the deceased, or upon complaint from the husband (wife).

(3) If due to a matriarchal institution the power of the father is exercised by someone other than the father, then the crime can also be prosecuted on the complaint of that person.

Article 321

(1) Anyone who broadcasts, displays or displays in public a writing or picture whose contents are insulting or which defames a deceased person, with the intention that the contents of the letter or picture become known or become more known to the public, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of one month and two weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If the person guilty commits the crime in carrying out his profession, and at that time two years have not yet passed since the criminal conviction which has become final due to the same crime, then his right to carry out the profession may be revoked.


(3) This crime shall not be prosecuted unless there is a complaint from the person designated in Article 319 and Article 320, paragraphs two and three.

Chapter XVII - Revealing the Secret

Article 322

(1) Anyone who intentionally reveals a secret which he is obliged to keep because of his position or profession, whether present or former, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of nine thousand rupiah.


(2) If a crime is committed against a particular person, then the act can only be prosecuted upon a complaint from that person.

Article 323

(1) Anyone who intentionally discloses specific matters about a trading, craft or agricultural company where he works or previously worked, which he must keep secret, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of nine thousand rupiah.

(2) This crime is only prosecuted based on a complaint from the company's management.

Chapter XVIII - Crimes Against the Liberty of the Person
Article 324

Any person who, at his own expense or at someone else's expense, carries out a slave trade or carries out acts of slave trafficking or intentionally participates directly or indirectly in one of the acts mentioned above, is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of twelve years.

Article 325

(1) Any person who, as a captain, works or serves on a ship and knows that the ship is being used for the purpose of trading slaves, or the ship is being used for the slave trade, is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of twelve years.

(2) If the transportation results in the death of one or more slaves, the captain is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of fifteen years.

Article 326

Anyone who works as a crew member on a ship, knowing that the ship is being used for the purposes or purposes of the slave trade, or who voluntarily remains on board after hearing that the ship is being used for the purposes or purposes of the slave trade, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of nine years.


Article 327

Whoever, at his own expense or at the expense of another person, directly or indirectly cooperates in renting, transporting or insuring a ship, knowing that the ship is used for the purpose of the slave trade, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of eight years.

Article 328

Whoever takes away a person from his place of residence or temporary stay with the intention of placing that person unlawfully under his or another person's power, or of placing him or her in a state of distress, shall be punished by kidnapping with a maximum imprisonment of twelve years.


Article 329

Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully transports people to another area, even though the person has made an agreement to work in a certain place, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

Article 330

(1) Anyone who intentionally removes a minor from the authority which is legally assigned to him, or from the supervision of a person authorized to do so, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of seven years.


(2) If in this case there is trickery, violence or threats of violence, or if the child is not yet twelve years old, a maximum prison sentence of nine years shall be imposed.


Article 331

Anyone who intentionally conceals a minor who is withdrawn or withdraws himself from the authority that is legally assigned to him, or from the supervision of a person authorized to do so, or intentionally withdraws him from the investigation of a judicial or police official, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of four years, or if the child is under twelve years of age, with a maximum imprisonment of seven years.


Article 332

(1) Those guilty of running away with a woman are subject to imprisonment;

1. a maximum of seven years, anyone who carries off a woman who is not yet an adult, without the will of her parents or guardian but with her consent, with the intention of ensuring her control over the woman, whether within or outside of marriage;

2. a maximum of nine years, anyone who carries off a woman by trickery, violence or threat of violence, with the intention of ensuring his control over her, whether within or outside of marriage.


(2) Prosecution is only carried out upon complaint.

(3) Complaints are made:

a. if the woman is not yet an adult when she is taken away, she herself or another person must give permission for her to marry;

b. if the woman was taken away as an adult, by herself or by her husband.

(4) If the person who was taken away then marries the woman who was taken away and the Burgerlijk Wetboek rules apply to the marriage, then no crime can be imposed before the marriage is declared annulled.

Article 333

(1) Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully deprives someone of their liberty, or continues such deprivation of liberty, shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of eight years.

(2) If the act results in serious injury, the guilty party is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine years.

(3) If it results in death, the penalty is a maximum of twelve years imprisonment.


(4) The criminal penalties stipulated in this article also apply to people who intentionally and unlawfully provide a place for the deprivation of liberty.

Article 334

(1) Whoever, through negligence, causes someone to be unlawfully deprived of their liberty, or continues such deprivation of liberty, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of three months or a fine of a maximum of three hundred rupiah.


(2) If the act results in serious injury, the guilty party is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine months.

(3) If it results in death, the penalty is imprisonment for a maximum of one year.

Article 335

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah:

1. anyone who unlawfully forces another person to do, not do or allow something, by using violence, another act or unpleasant treatment, or by using the threat of violence, another act or unpleasant treatment, either against that person or another person;



2 Whoever forces another person to do, not do or allow something with the threat of written defamation or defamation.


(2) In the case as formulated in point 2, the crime will only be prosecuted based on a complaint from the person affected.

Article 336

(1) Anyone who openly threatens with violence against people or property with joint force, with a crime that creates a public danger to the safety of people or property, with rape or an act that violates morality, with a crime against life, with serious assault or with arson shall be punished with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.


(2) If the threat is made in writing and with certain conditions, then the penalty is a maximum of five years' imprisonment.

Article 337

In the case of criminal punishment based on one of the crimes in Articles 324 - 333 and Article 336 paragraph two, revocation of rights based on Article 35 No. 1 - 4 may be imposed.

Chapter XIX - Crimes Against Life
Article 338

Anyone who intentionally takes the life of another person is threatened with murder with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.

Article 339

Murder that is followed, accompanied or preceded by a criminal act, which is carried out with the intention of preparing or facilitating its execution, or to free oneself or other participants from punishment if caught in the act, or to ensure control of goods obtained illegally, is punishable by life imprisonment or a certain period of imprisonment, a maximum of twenty years.


Article 340

Anyone who intentionally and with prior planning takes the life of another person, is threatened with premeditated murder, with the death penalty or life imprisonment or a certain period of time, a maximum of twenty years.

Article 341

A mother who, out of fear of being discovered giving birth to a child at the time of birth or shortly thereafter, intentionally takes the life of her child, is threatened with murdering her own child, with a maximum prison sentence of seven years.


Article 342

A mother who, in order to carry out a predetermined intention due to fear of being discovered that she will give birth to a child at the time of the child's birth or shortly thereafter takes the life of her child, is threatened with committing premeditated murder of her own child, with a maximum prison sentence of nine years.

Article 343

The crimes described in articles 341 and 342 are seen by other people who participate in committing them, as murder or murder of a child with premeditation.

Article 344

Whoever takes the life of another person at the request of that person, which is clearly stated with sincerity, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years.


Article 345

Anyone who intentionally encourages another person to commit suicide, helps him in doing so or provides him with the means to do so, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years if the person commits suicide.

Article 346 A woman who intentionally aborts or terminates her pregnancy or orders someone else to do so, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years.


Article 347

(1) Anyone who intentionally causes a woman to abort or kills her pregnancy without her consent shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of twelve years.


(2) If the act results in the death of the woman, the perpetrator shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.

Article 348

(1) Anyone who intentionally causes a woman to abort or kill her pregnancy without her consent shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of five years and six months.

(2) If the act results in the death of the woman, the perpetrator shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

Article 349

If a doctor, midwife or pharmacist helps commit a crime based on Article 346, or commits or helps commit one of the crimes described in Articles 347 and 348, then the punishment determined in that article is

may be increased by one third and the right to carry out the profession in which the crime was committed may be revoked.

Article 350

In the case of a conviction for murder, premeditated murder, or for one of the crimes under Articles 344, 347 and 348, revocation of rights under Article 35 No. 1-5 may be imposed.

Chapter XX - Persecution
Article 351

(1) Abuse is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If the act results in serious injury, the guilty party is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years.

(3) If it results in death, the threat of a maximum prison sentence of seven years is punishable by imprisonment.

(4) With abuse is equated with intentionally damaging health.

(5) Attempts to commit this crime are not punishable.

Article 352

(1) Except as stated in articles 353 and 356, abuse which does not cause illness or hinder the performance of official work or search, is punishable as light abuse, with a maximum prison sentence of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah. The sentence may be increased by one third for a person who commits the crime against someone who works for him or is his subordinate.


(2) Attempts to commit this crime are not punishable.

Article 353

(1) Abuse with prior planning is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of four years.

(2) If the act results in serious injury, the guilty party shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

(3) If the act results in death, the person guilty shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of nine years.

Article 354

(1) Anyone who intentionally seriously injures another person is threatened with serious assault with a maximum prison sentence of eight years.

(2) If the act results in death, the guilty party shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of ten years.

Article 355

(1) Serious assault committed with prior planning is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of twelve years.

(2) If the act results in death, the guilty person is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of fifteen years.

Article 356

The penalties specified in articles 351, 353, 354 and 355 may be increased by one third:

1. for those who commit the crime against their mother, legal father, wife or child;


2. if the crime is committed against an official while or because of carrying out his legitimate duties;

3. if the crime is committed by providing substances that are dangerous to life or health to be eaten or drunk.

Article 357

In the case of criminal conviction for one of the crimes under Articles 353 and 355, revocation of rights under Article 3o No. 1 - 4 may be imposed.

Article 358

Those who intentionally participate in an attack or fight in which several people are involved, in addition to their individual responsibility for what they specifically do, are threatened with:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months, if the attack or fight results in serious injuries;

2. with a maximum prison sentence of four years, if the result is death.

Chapter XXI

Causing Death or Injury Due to Negligence

Article 359

Anyone who, due to his mistake (negligence), causes the death of another person, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years or a maximum imprisonment of one year.

Article 360

(1) Anyone who, due to his mistake (negligence), causes another person to suffer serious injury, shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of five years or a maximum imprisonment of one year.

(2) Anyone who, due to his mistake (negligence), causes another person to be injured in such a way that illness or an obstacle arises in carrying out his official work or profession for a certain period of time, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum imprisonment of six months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 361

If the crime described in this chapter is committed in the exercise of a position or profession, then the penalty is increased by one third and the guilty person may be deprived of his right to carry out the profession in which the crime was committed and the judge may order that his verdict be announced.

Chapter XXII - Theft
Article 362

Anyone who takes something, which belongs wholly or partly to another person, with the intention of possessing it unlawfully, is threatened with theft, with a maximum prison sentence of five years or a maximum fine of nine hundred rupiah.


Article 363

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years:

1. livestock theft;

2. theft during a fire, eruption, flood, earthquake, or seaquake, volcanic eruption, shipwreck, stranded ship, train accident, riot, rebellion or danger of war;

3. theft at night in a house or enclosed yard where there is a house, carried out by a person who is there unknown to or not wanted by the person entitled to it;

4. theft committed by two or more people:

5. theft in which the crime is committed, or the goods to be taken are broken into, cut or climbed over, or by using a fake key, a fake order or fake official clothing.


(2) If the theft described in point 3 is accompanied by one of the things in points 4 and 5, then the penalty is a maximum prison sentence of nine years.

Article 364

The acts described in Article 362 and Article 363 point 4, as well as the acts described in Article 363 point 5, if not committed in a house or enclosed yard where there is a house, if the value of the stolen goods is not more than twenty-five rupiah, are punishable as light theft with a maximum prison sentence of three months or a maximum fine of two hundred and fifty rupiah.


Article 365

(1) Theft preceded, accompanied or followed by violence or the threat of violence, against a person with the intention of preparing or facilitating the theft, or in the case of being caught in the act, to enable the escape of oneself or another participant, or to retain control of the stolen goods, shall be punished with a maximum prison sentence of nine years.

(2) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years:

1. if the act is committed at night in a house or enclosed yard where there is a house, on foot;

2. if the act is carried out by two or more people in partnership;

3. If you enter a place of crime by damaging or climbing or by using a fake key, fake command or fake official clothing.


4. if the action results in serious injuries.

(3) If the act results in death, the perpetrator is subject to a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.

(4) Threatened with the death penalty or life imprisonment or a maximum period of twenty years, if the act results in serious injury or death and is committed by two or more people in association, accompanied by one of the things described in no. 1 and 3.

Article 366

In the case of criminal punishment based on one of the acts formulated in Articles 362, 363 and 865, revocation of rights based on Article 35 No. 1 - 4 may be imposed.


Article 367

(1) If the perpetrator or accomplice of one of the crimes in this chapter is the husband (wife) of the person who is the victim of the crime and is not separated from bed and board or from property, then it is not possible to bring criminal charges against the perpetrator or accomplice.

(2) If he is a husband (wife) who is separated by bed and board or by property, or if he is a blood relative or in-law, either in a direct line or a second degree deviant line, then it is only possible to prosecute that person if there is a complaint that he has committed a crime.

(3) If according to the matriarchal institution, the father's authority is exercised by someone other than the biological father (himself), then the provisions of the paragraph above also apply to that person.


Chapter XXIII - Blackmail and Threats
Article 368

(1) Anyone who, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person, forces someone by violence or threat of violence to give something, which in whole or in part belongs to that person or another person, or to make a debt or write off a debt, is threatened with extortion and a maximum prison sentence of nine months.



(2) The provisions of article 365 paragraphs two, three and four apply to this crime.

Article 369

(1) Anyone who, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person, by threatening to defame someone either verbally or in writing, or by threatening to reveal a secret, forces someone to give something which belongs wholly or partly to that person or another person, or to make a debt or write off a debt, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years.


(2) This crime is not prosecuted except upon complaint from the person who was the victim of the crime.

Article 370

The provisions of article 367 apply to the crimes formulated in this chapter.

Article 37l

In the case of criminal punishment based on one of the crimes formulated in this chapter, revocation of rights may be imposed based on Article 35 no. 1 - 4.

Chapter XXIV - Embezzlement

Article 372

Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully possesses something which belongs wholly or partly to another person, but which is in his control not because of a crime, is threatened with embezzlement, with a maximum prison sentence of four years or a maximum fine of nine hundred rupiah.


Article 373

The act formulated in Article 372, if the thing embezzled is not livestock and the value is not more than twenty-five rupiah, is threatened as minor embezzlement with a maximum prison sentence of three months or a maximum fine of two hundred and fifty rupiah.

Article 374

Embezzlement committed by a person whose control over goods is due to an employment relationship or because of a search or because he receives wages for it, is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of five years.

Article 375

Embezzlement committed by a person who is forced to be given goods to be kept, or committed by a guardian, administrator or executor of a will, administrator of a social institution or foundation, against goods which he controls as such, is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of six years.

Article 376

The provisions in article 367 apply to the crimes formulated in this chapter.


Article 377

(1) In the case of a conviction based on one of the crimes defined in Articles 372, 374 and 375, the judge may order that the verdict be announced and the rights based on Article 35 No. 1 4 be revoked.

(2) If a crime is committed while carrying out a profession, the right to carry out that profession may be revoked.

Chapter XXV

Fraudulent Acts
Article 378

Any person who, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person, by using a false name or false dignity, by deception or a series of lies, induces another person to hand over something to him, or to give him a debt or write off a receivable, is threatened for fraud with a maximum prison sentence of four years.


Article 379

The act formulated in Article 378, if the goods handed over are not livestock and the price of the goods, debt or receivable is not more than twenty-five rupiah, is punishable as light fraud with a maximum prison sentence of three months or a maximum fine of two hundred and fifty rupiah.

Article 379a

Anyone who makes it a livelihood or habit to buy goods, with the intention of ensuring control of those goods for himself or another person without full payment, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years.


Article 380

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months or a maximum fine of five thousand rupiah:

1. Whoever puts a false name or mark on or in a literary, scientific, artistic or craft product, or falsifies a genuine name or mark, with the intention of making people think that it is really the product of the person whose name or mark he has put on or in it;


2. Whoever intentionally sells, offers, delivers, has stock for sale or imports into Indonesia, literary, scientific, artistic or craft products, in or on which a false name or mark has been placed, or whose original name or mark has been falsified, as if it were really the product of the person whose name or mark has been falsely placed.



(2) If the proceeds belong to the convict, they may be confiscated.

Article 381

Whoever by means of deception misleads the insurer regarding the circumstances relating to the insurance so that it is agreed to

an agreement, which he would certainly not have agreed to, or at least not with such conditions, if he had known the actual circumstances, is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

Article 382

Anyone who, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person, to the detriment of the insurer or the holder of a valid bodemerij letter, causes a fire or explosion on goods insured against fire, or sinks, strands, destroys, damages, or renders unusable the insured ship or the cargo or wages to be received for the transportation of the insured cargo, or for which bodemerij money has been received, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years.



Article 382 bis
Anyone who, in order to obtain, continue or expand the results of his own trade or company or that of another person, commits a fraudulent act to mislead the general public or a certain person, is threatened, if the act can cause losses to his competitors or competitors of another person, due to unfair competition, with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum fine of thirteen thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 383

A seller who cheats a buyer is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months:

1. because of intentionally submitting goods other than those designated for purchase;

2 regarding the type, condition or quantity of goods delivered, using deception.

Article 383 bis
A holder of a bill of lading who intentionally uses several copies of the letter with an incriminating title, and for several recipients, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.

Article 384

The act formulated in Article 383 is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of three months or a maximum fine of two hundred and fifty rupiah, if the amount of profit obtained is not more than twenty-five rupiah.

Article 385

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years:

1. anyone who, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person, sells, exchanges or encumbers with creditverband a land right that has a certificate, a building, structure, planting or seeding on land that has not been certified, even though it is known that the person who has or also has rights thereto is another person;


2. Whoever with the same intention sells, exchanges or encumbers with a creditor, a land right that has not been certified and has been encumbered with a creditor or a building, planting or seeding on land that has also been encumbered in this way, without notifying the other party about the existence of the encumbrance;


3. anyone who, with the same intention, creates a credit agreement regarding a land right that has not been certified, by concealing from another party that the land related to the right has been mortgaged;


4. Whoever, with the same intention, mortgages or rents land with land rights that have not been certified, even though it is known that another person owns or also owns rights to the land:


5. Anyone who, with the same intention, sells or exchanges land for land rights that have not been certified and that have been mortgaged, even though he does not inform the other party that the land has been mortgaged;

6. Anyone who, with the same intention, sells or exchanges land with land rights that have not been certified for a period, even though it is known that the land has been rented to another person for that period.

Article 386

(1) Anyone who sells, offers or delivers food, drink or medicine knowing that it is counterfeit, and conceals this, shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of four years.

(2) Food, drink or medicine is counterfeit if its value or benefits are reduced because it has been mixed with something else.

Article 387

(1) A contractor, building expert or seller of building materials who, when constructing a building or when delivering building materials, does something shall be punished with a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

fraudulent acts that can endanger the safety of people or goods, or the safety of the state in a state of war.

(2) Anyone who is tasked with supervising the construction or delivery of the goods and deliberately allows the fraudulent act to occur shall be subject to the same penalty.

Article 388

(1) Anyone who, when handing over goods needed by the Navy or Army, commits a fraudulent act which could endanger the country's chances in a state of war, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

(2) Anyone who is tasked with supervising the delivery of the goods and deliberately allows the fraudulent act to occur shall be subject to the same penalty.

Article 389

Anyone who, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person, destroys, moves, throws away or makes unusable something used to determine the boundaries of a plot, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.

Article 390

Anyone who, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person, by spreading false news which causes the price of goods, funds or securities to fall or rise shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.


Article 391

Any person who accepts an obligation for, or provides assistance in the placement of debt securities of a state or part thereof, or a general public institution, or debt securities of an association, foundation or company, tries to mobilize the general public for registration or participation, deliberately concealing or reducing the actual situation or by imagining a false situation, is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of four years.


Article 392

An entrepreneur, a manager or commissioner of a limited liability company, an Indonesian shareholding company or a cooperative, who intentionally announces a false list or balance sheet, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

Article 393

(1) Whoever brings into Indonesia without a clear purpose to take it out of Indonesia, sells, disguises, delivers, distributes or has in stock for sale or distribution, goods which he knows or should reasonably suspect are falsely attached to the goods themselves or to their packaging, the name of a firm or brand which is the right of another person or to indicate the origin of the goods, the name of a certain place, with the addition of an imaginary name or firm, or on the goods themselves or on their packaging such name, firm or brand is imitated even with a slight change, shall be punished with a maximum imprisonment of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of nine thousand rupiah.


(2) If at the time of committing the crime five years have passed since the conviction which has become final for such a crime, a maximum prison sentence of nine months may also be imposed.

Article 393 bis
(1) A lawyer who deliberately includes or orders to be included in a letter of application for divorce or separation of bed and board, or in a letter of application for bankruptcy, information about the residence or domicile of the defendant or debtor, even though he knows or should have suspected that the information is in conflict with the truth, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year.


(2) The husband (wife) who files the lawsuit or the debtor who submits a bankruptcy request is subject to the same criminal offense, who intentionally gives false information to the lawyer as intended in the first paragraph.

Article 394

The provisions of Article 367 apply to crimes formulated in this chapter except those formulated in the second paragraph of Article 393 bis, as long as the crime is committed in relation to a request for divorce or separation from bed and board.

Article 395

(1) In the case of a conviction based on one of the crimes defined in this chapter, the judge may order the announcement of his decision and the guilty person may be deprived of his right to carry out the profession at the time the crime was committed.

(2) In the case of criminal punishment based on one of the crimes formulated in Articles 378, 382, 385, 387, 388, 393 bis, the revocation of rights based on Articles No. 1 - 4 may be imposed.

Chapter XXVI - Acts that harm debtors or people who have rights
Article 396

An entrepreneur who is declared bankrupt or who is permitted to release his debt by the court, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months for causing loss to the creditor:

1. if the expenditure exceeds the limit;

2. if the person concerned, with the intention of postponing his bankruptcy, has borrowed money under burdensome conditions, knowing that the loan will not prevent bankruptcy;


3. if he cannot show in an unaltered state the books and letters for records according to Article 6 of the Commercial Code and the writings which he must keep according to that article.


Article 397

An entrepreneur who is declared bankrupt or permitted to discharge his debt by the court, is threatened with fraudulently harming the receivable if he is involved in reducing the receivable's rights fraudulently:

1. making expenses that do not exist, or not recording income, or withdrawing something from the account;

2. has given away (uervreemden) something for free or clearly below its price;

3. in a way that benefits one of the creditors at the time of his bankruptcy or at a time when it is known that such a situation cannot be prevented;

4. does not fulfill the obligation to keep records according to Article 6 paragraph one of the Commercial Code or to keep and show the books, letters and writings referred to in paragraph three of the article.

Article 398

A manager or commissioner of a limited liability company, Indonesian joint stock company or cooperative association which is declared bankrupt or whose case is ordered to be settled by the court, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months:


1. if the person concerned helps or permits the carrying out of acts which are contrary to the articles of association, so that as a result all or most of the losses are suffered by the company, airline or association,

2. if the person concerned, with the intention of delaying the bankruptcy or settlement of a company, airline or association, helps or permits the borrowing of money with burdensome conditions, even though he knows that the bankruptcy or settlement cannot be prevented;

3. if the person concerned can be blamed for not fulfilling the obligations described in Article 6, paragraph one of the Commercial Code and Article 27, paragraph one of the Ordinance on Indonesian Share Companies, or if the books and letters containing the notes and writings kept according to the aforementioned article cannot be shown in an unaltered state.

Article 399

A manager or commissioner of a limited liability company, Indonesian joint venture company or cooperative association which is declared bankrupt or whose settlement is ordered by the court, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years if the person concerned fraudulently reduces the rights of creditors of the company, airline or association for:

1. making expenses that do not exist, or not recording income or withdrawing something from the account;

2. has offered (uerureemden) something for nothing or clearly below its price;

3. in any way benefits one of the creditors at the time of bankruptcy or settlement, or at a time when he knows that the bankruptcy or settlement cannot be prevented;

4. not fulfilling the obligation to keep records according to the Commercial Code or Article 27 paragraph one of the ordinance on Indonesian share companies, and regarding keeping and showing books, letters and writings according to those articles.


Article 400

A maximum imprisonment of five years and six months is threatened with anyone who reduces by fraud the rights of a debtor:

1. in the case of release of the debt, bankruptcy or settlement or when it is known that one of them will occur and is then actually followed by release of the debt. bankruptcy or settlement withdrawing something from the debt or receiving payment for both uncollectible and collectible debts, in the latter case with the knowledge that the debtor's bankruptcy or settlement has been requested, or as a result of negotiations with the debtor;

2. at the time of verification of receivables in the event of a release of debt, bankruptcy or settlement, admitting the existence of receivables that do not exist or increasing the amount of existing receivables.

Article 401

(1) A creditor who agrees to an offer of agreement before the court because there is already an agreement with the debtor or a third party in which the person concerned requests special benefits, is threatened with a prison sentence of up to one year and four months, if the agreement is accepted.

(2) The debtor is subject to the same punishment in cases as above, or if the debtor is a company, airline, association or foundation, the management or commissioner who entered into the agreement.

Article 402

Anyone who is declared to be clearly incapacitated or, if not an entrepreneur, is declared bankrupt or is allowed to release the debt, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years and six months. If the person concerned fraudulently reduces the rights of the creditor by making up non-existent expenses, or concealing income, or withdrawing goods from the debt or has sold goods for free or clearly below their value, or at the time of his incapacity, release of his debt or bankruptcy, or at a time when he knows that one of the aforementioned circumstances cannot be prevented, benefits one of the creditors in some way.


Article 403

A manager or commissioner of a limited liability company, Indonesian joint venture company or cooperative association who, outside the provisions of Article 398, assists or permits acts that are contrary to the articles of association, and therefore results in the company, airline or association being unable to fulfill its obligations, or having to be dissolved, is threatened with a maximum fine of one hundred and fifty thousand rupiah.


Article 404

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years.

1. anyone who deliberately withdraws property belonging to himself, or if this is not the case for its owner, from another person who has a lien, right to retain, levy the proceeds or use it;

2. Whoever intentionally, in whole or in part, withdraws his own property or otherwise the property of the owner from the mortgage bond

3. anyone who intentionally, in whole or in part, withdraws an item which is burdened with a harvest bond or for the person who gives the bond withdraws an item which is burdened with a harvest bond by another person, to the detriment of the holder of the bond;

4. Whoever intentionally, in whole or in part, withdraws an item belonging to himself or, if so, to its owner, from a credit bond thereon, to the detriment of the bond holder.


Article 405

(1) In the case of criminal punishment based on one of the crimes formulated in articles 397, 399, 400 and 402, the guilty person may have their rights revoked based on article 35.

(2) Sentencing based on one of the crimes as formulated in articles 396 - 402, may be ordered to have the judge's decision announced.

Chapter XXVIII - Crimes of Office
Article 413

A commander of the Armed Forces who refuses or deliberately neglects to use force under his command, when required by the competent civil authority according to law, shall be punished by imprisonment for a term of four years.


Article 414

(1) An official who deliberately requests assistance from the Armed Forces to oppose the implementation of statutory provisions, orders of general authorities according to statutes, court decisions or warrants, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of seven years.


(2) If implementation is hampered by such acts, the guilty party is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of nine years.

Article 415

An official or other person who is assigned to carry out a public office continuously or temporarily, who intentionally embezzles money or securities held by him because of his position, or allows said money or securities to be taken or embezzled by another person, or helps as an accomplice in carrying out such an act, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years.


Article 416

An official or other person who is given the task of carrying out a public office continuously or temporarily, who intentionally makes false or falsifies books or registers specifically for administrative inspection, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years.

Article 417

An official or other person who is assigned to carry out a public office continuously or temporarily who intentionally embezzles, destroys, damages or makes unusable goods intended to convince or prove before the competent authority, deeds, letters or lists which he controls because of his position, or allows another person to lose, destroy, damage or make unusable such goods, or helps as an accomplice in carrying out such acts, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years and six months.




Article 418

An official who accepts a gift or promise when he knows or should have suspected that the gift or promise was given because of the power or authority related to his position, or which in the opinion of the person giving the gift or promise is related to his position, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of six years or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 419

An official is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years if:

l. who accepts a gift or promise even though he knows that the gift or promise was given to encourage him to do or not do something in his position that is contrary to his obligations;


2. The person receiving the gift knows that the gift was given as a result of, or because the recipient has done or not done something in his position that is contrary to his obligations.


Article 420

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine years:

1. a judge who accepts a gift or promise, even though it is known that the gift or promise was given to influence the decision on a case that is his/her duty;

2. Anyone who, according to the provisions of the law, is appointed as an advisor to attend a court hearing, accepts a gift or promise, even though it is known that the gift or promise was given to influence advice on a case that must be decided by the court.


(2) If the gift or promise is accepted with the knowledge that the gift or promise is given in order to be punished in a criminal case, then the guilty party is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years.

Article 421

An official who abuses his power by forcing someone to do, not do or allow something, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.


Article 422

An official who in a criminal case uses means of coercion, either to extort a confession or to obtain information, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years.


Article 423

An official who intends to benefit himself or another person unlawfully, by abusing his power, forcing someone to give something, to pay or receive payment with deductions, or to do something for himself, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of six years.


Article 424

An official who, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person, by abusing his power, uses state land over which there are Indonesian usage rights, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of six years.


Article 425

Threatened with committing extortion with a maximum prison sentence of seven years:

1. an official who, while carrying out his duties, requests, receives or deducts payment, as if he owes it to him, another official or the general treasury, even though he knows that this is not the case;


2. an official who, while carrying out his duties, requests or accepts work from other people or the handover of goods as if

is a debt to himself, even though he knows that this is not the case;


3. an official who, while carrying out his duties, as if in accordance with the relevant regulations, has used state land on which there are Indonesian usage rights to the detriment of the entitled party, even though he knows that this is in conflict with the regulations.


Article 426

(1) An official who is given the task of guarding a person whose liberty has been taken away by order of the public authority or by a court decision or decree, who intentionally allows the person to escape or intentionally releases him, or provides assistance when he is released or escapes, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years.


(2) If the person runs away, is released or escapes due to an error (negligence), then the person concerned is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of two months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 427

(1) Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years:

1. an official tasked with investigating criminal acts, who deliberately does not comply with a request to declare that a person has been unlawfully deprived of their liberty, or who deliberately does not notify a higher authority of this;

2. An official who, in carrying out his duties, knows that someone has been unlawfully deprived of their liberty, intentionally does not inform the official in charge of investigating the criminal act about this.

(2) A criminal who is guilty (negligent) of causing what is formulated in this article to be carried out, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 428

A head of a correctional institution where convicts, temporary detainees or hostages are confined, or a head of a state educational institution or mental hospital, who refuses to comply with a request according to law to show the person admitted there, or to show the admission register, or the deeds which, according to general rules, must be present for admitting a person there.

Article 429

(1) An official who exceeds his authority or without paying attention to the methods determined in general regulations, forces his way into a house or room or enclosed yard used by another person, or if he is there unlawfully, does not immediately leave at the request of the authorized person or on behalf of that person, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) An official who, when searching a house, by exceeding his authority or without observing the methods prescribed in the general regulations, examines or seizes letters, books or other papers, shall be punished with the same criminal penalty.


Article 430

(1) An official who exceeds his authority, orders the showing of or confiscates letters, postcards, goods or packages handed over to a public transportation agency or cables in the hands of a telegraph official for public purposes, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.


(2) The same penalty shall be imposed on an official who exceeds his authority by ordering a telephone official or another person assigned to work on telephones for public purposes to provide him with information about a conversation conducted through that institution.

Article 431

An official of a public transportation agency who intentionally and unlawfully opens a sealed letter or package handed over to that agency, examines its contents, or discloses its contents to another person, is subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years.

Article 432

(1) A criminal of a public transportation agency who intentionally gives to another person other than the rightful person, a closed letter, postcard or package entrusted to that agency, or destroys, removes, takes possession of or changes the contents, or takes possession of any item contained therein, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years.

(2) If the letter or item has monetary value, then ownership of it is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

Article 433

A telegraph or telephone official, or other person assigned to inspect telegraph or telephone work used for public purposes, shall be punished by:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of two years, if he intentionally and unlawfully informs another person, news submitted to a telegraph or telephone service or to a similar institution, or intentionally and unlawfully opens, reads or informs another person of telegraph or telephone news;


2. with a maximum prison sentence of five years, if he intentionally gives it to someone other than the rightful person or destroys, removes, owns it himself or changes the contents of a telegraph or telephone message that is submitted to a telegraph or telephone service or similar institution.

Article 434

An official of a public transportation agency, a telegraph or telephone official or another person referred to in Article 433, who intentionally allows another person to commit one of the acts referred to in Articles 431 - 433, or assists another person in such acts, shall be subject to criminal penalties according to the differences stipulated in these articles.

Article 435

An official who directly or indirectly intentionally participates in the contracting, handing over or leasing of goods, which at the time of the act, for all or part of which he is assigned to manage or supervise, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of eighteen thousand rupiah.


Article 436

(1) Anyone who, according to the law applicable to each party, has the authority to solemnize a marriage of a person, even though he knows that the marriage or marriages of that person which already exist constitute an obstacle to that under the law, shall be threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years.


(2) Anyone who, according to the law applicable to each party, has the authority to carry out a marriage of a person, even though he knows that there is an obstacle to doing so based on the law, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 437

In the case of criminal penalties based on Articles 415, 419, 420, 423, 434, 425, 432, last paragraph, and Article 436, first paragraph, revocation of rights based on Article 35, No. 3 and 4 may be imposed.

Chapter XXIX - Maritime Crimes
Article 438

(1) Threatened for committing piracy at sea:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years, anyone who enters the service of captain or carries out that work on a ship, even though he knows that the ship is intended or used to carry out acts of violence on the high seas against other ships or against people and goods on board, without having received authority to do so from a belligerent country or without joining the navy of a recognized country;


2. with a maximum prison sentence of twelve years, anyone who knows about the purpose or use of the ship, enters into work as a crew member on the ship or voluntarily continues to do the work after he has known about it, or is part of the ship's crew.


(2) It is the same as not having a power of attorney, if it goes beyond what is authorized, likewise if you hold a power of attorney from countries that are at war with each other.

(3) Article 89 does not apply.

Article 439

(1) Anyone who, using a ship, commits acts of violence against another ship or against people or goods on board it in Indonesian waters shall be punished by a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years for committing piracy at sea.


(2) What is meant by Indonesian maritime territory is the territory of the "Territoriale zee en maritieme kringen ordonantie, S. 1939 442."

Article 440

Anyone who, on land or in the waters around the coast or river mouth, commits an act of violence against people or goods there, after having first crossed the sea in whole or in part for that purpose, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of fifteen years.

Article 441

Anyone who, using a ship, commits acts of violence on a river against another ship or against people or goods on board, after arriving at the place and for that purpose by ship from another place, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.

Article 442

Anyone who accepts or carries out work as commander or leader of a ship, knowing that the ship is intended or used to commit one of the acts defined in Articles 439-441, shall be punished with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.


Article 443

Anyone who accepts or carries out work as a sailor on a ship, even though he knows that the ship is intended or used to carry out one of the acts formulated in articles 439 - 441 or who voluntarily remains working on the ship, after he knows that the ship is used as explained above, is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of ten years.



Article 444

If the acts of violence described in articles 438-441 result in the death of a person on the attacked ship or of a person who is attacked, then the captain, commander or leader of the ship and those who participate in the act of violence are threatened with the death penalty, life imprisonment, or imprisonment for a certain period of time, up to twenty years.

Article 445

Anyone who equips a ship at his own expense or that of another person, with the intention of using it as defined in Article 438 or with the intention of committing one of the acts defined in Articles 439 - 441, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years.

Article 446

Whoever, at his own expense or that of another person, directly or indirectly participates in the rental, loading or insurance of a ship, knowing that the ship will be used as defined in articles 438, 38, or to carry out one of the acts defined in articles 439
- 441, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of twelve years.


Article 447

Anyone who intentionally surrenders an Indonesian ship to the control of pirates, coastal pirates, coastal pirates or river pirates, shall be threatened with:

1. with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years, if he is the captain of the ship;

2. with a maximum imprisonment of twelve years, in other cases.

Article 448

An Indonesian ship passenger who unlawfully seizes control of the ship is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

Article 449

A captain of an Indonesian ship who takes a ship from its owner or from its operator and uses it for his own profit, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of eight years and six months.

Article 450

An Indonesian citizen who, without permission from the Indonesian Government, receives letters, pirates, or accepts or carries out work as captain of a ship, even though it is known that the ship is intended or used for piracy without permission from the Indonesian Government, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years.


Article 451

An Indonesian citizen who accepts employment as a sailor on a ship, knowing that the ship is intended or used for piracy without permission from the Indonesian Government, or who voluntarily continues to work as a sailor after knowing the purpose or use of the ship, is subject to a maximum prison sentence of four years.


Article 451 bis
(1) A captain of an Indonesian ship who orders the preparation of a ship's statement, knowing that the contents are contrary to reality, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of five years.

(2) Sailors who participate in ordering the creation of a ship's statement which they know is false shall be punished with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.


Article 451 ter

Anyone who, in order to comply with the regulations in paragraph three of Article 12 of the regulations on ship registration, shows a certificate which he knows to be false, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of five years.

Article 452

(1) Whoever in the minutes of a ship's statement, orders to write a false statement about a fact the truth of which must be stated in the deed with the intention of using or ordering another person to use the deed, as if the statement were in accordance with reality, is punished, if because

The use of this time can cause losses with a maximum prison sentence of eight years.


(2) Anyone who intentionally uses the deed as if its contents were in accordance with reality, if that use can result in loss, shall be threatened with the same penalty.


Article 453

A captain of an Indonesian ship who, after the commencement of the acceptance or rental of crew members, intentionally and unlawfully withdraws from the command of the ship before the contract expires, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.


Article 454

A sailor who, contrary to his obligations under the work agreement, withdraws from his duties on an Indonesian ship, if, according to the circumstances at the time of committing the act, there is a fear that danger will arise for the ship, passengers or cargo of the ship, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months.

Article 455

Threatened with committing ordinary desertion, with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks, a crew member of an Indonesian ship, who deliberately and unlawfully does not follow or does not continue a journey that he has agreed to.


Article 456

Abolished based on S. 34 - 124 jo. 38 - 2.

Article 457

The punishment specified in articles 454 and 455 can be doubled, if two or more people conspire to commit the crime, or if the crime is committed as a result of an evil conspiracy to do so.

Article 458

(1) An entrepreneur, bookkeeper or captain of an Indonesian ship who accepts a crew member to work, even though he knows that the crew member has not been a month since withdrawing from his agreement with the Indonesian ship as formulated in one of the articles 454 or 455, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) There is no criminal penalty if the acceptance of work is carried out outside Indonesia with the permission of the Indonesian consul, or if this does not exist, at the request of the local authorities.

Article 459

(1) An Indonesian ship passenger who on board the ship attacks the captain, resists him with violence or the threat of violence, intentionally deprives him of his freedom of movement or an Indonesian crew member on board the ship who does this in the course of his work towards a person of higher rank, shall be punished for committing insubordination with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.


(2) The guilty person is threatened with:

1. a maximum prison sentence of four years, if the crime or other accompanying acts result in injury;

2. a maximum prison sentence of eight years and six months if it results in serious injury;

3. a maximum prison sentence of twelve years, if it results in death.

Article 460

(1) Insubordination carried out by two or more people in an alliance is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of seven years for committing rebellion on a ship. (2) The guilty party is threatened with

1. a maximum prison sentence of eight years and six months if the crime or other accompanying acts result in injury;


2. a maximum prison sentence of twelve years, if it results in serious injury;

3. a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years if it results in death.

Article 461

Anyone on board an Indonesian ship who incites rebellion shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of six years.

Article 462

Refusal of work by two or more Indonesian crew members in collaboration or as a result of a criminal conspiracy is punishable by a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.

Article 463

A crew member from an Indonesian ship who, after being subjected to disciplinary action for refusing to work, continues to refuse work, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine months.

Article 464

(1) An Indonesian ship passenger is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of nine months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah;

1. who deliberately does not obey the captain's orders given for safety or to maintain order and discipline on board the ship;

2. who does not provide assistance according to his ability to the captain, when he knows that he has been deprived of his freedom of movement;


3. who deliberately does not inform the captain when he knows of the intention to commit insubordination.

(2) The provisions in no. 3 do not apply if insuhordination does not occur.

Article 465

The penalties threatened in articles 448, 451, 454, 464 can be increased by one third if the person committing one of the crimes formulated in that article holds the rank of ship's officer.


Article 466

An Indonesian ship captain who, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person or to cover up such an act, sells his ship, or borrows money by pledging his ship or the ship's equipment or supplies, or sells or pawns the ship's cargo or supplies, or reduces losses or expenditure, or fails to ensure that the daily logbooks on board are maintained according to law, or fails to take care of the safety of the ship's documents when leaving the ship, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of seven years.


Article 467

An Indonesian ship captain who, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person, or to conceal such benefit, changes the course of his ship, is subject to a maximum imprisonment of four years.


Article 468

An Indonesian ship captain who, outside of his obligation or contrary to the laws applicable to him, abandons his ship during a voyage, and also orders or gives permission to his crew to do so, is subject to a maximum prison sentence of five years and six months.

Article 469

(1) An Indonesian ship captain who, outside of his obligation and without the prior knowledge of the ship owner or operator, carries out or allows the carrying out of

Any act of which he knows that because of this his ship or its cargo is likely to be seized, detained or obstructed shall be punishable by a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum fine of nine thousand rupiah.

(2) A ship passenger who, outside of necessity and without the prior knowledge of the captain, commits the same act with the same knowledge, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of one year or a fine of up to nine thousand rupiah.


Article 470

An Indonesian ship captain who, beyond his obligation, intentionally fails to provide his passengers with what they are required to provide shall be punished by a maximum imprisonment of two years and eight months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 471

An Indonesian ship captain who intentionally dumps cargo beyond what is required and in violation of the laws applicable to him, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 472

Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully destroys, damages or renders unusable cargo, supplies or necessary goods on board a ship shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of two years and eight months.

Article 472 bis
Anyone who acts as a stowaway on a ship is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of three months.

Article 473

A captain who uses the Indonesian flag, even though he knows that he is not entitled to do so, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 474

A captain who, by using signs on his ship, intentionally creates the impression that his ship is an Indonesian warship, Navy ship or a scout ship operating in Indonesian waters or sea canals, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 475

Any person who, outside of his obligation to carry out the work of captain, helmsman or engineer on an Indonesian ship, knowing that his authority to sail has been revoked by the competent authority, shall be subject to a maximum imprisonment of nine months or a maximum fine of nine thousand rupiah.

Article 476

An Indonesian ship captain who, without acceptable reason, refuses to comply with a statutory request to receive on board his ship an accused or convict along with objects related to his case, shall be subject to a maximum imprisonment of four months and two weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 477

(1) An Indonesian ship captain who intentionally allows an accused or convict to escape or releases or provides assistance when he is released or frees himself, even though the person was accepted on his ship at the request of the law, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years.

(2) If the person runs away, is released or frees himself due to the negligence of the captain, he is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of two months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 478

An Indonesian ship captain who deliberately fails to fulfill his obligation according to the first paragraph of Article 358a of the Commercial Code to provide assistance if his ship is involved in a collision, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years.

Article 479

In the case of criminal punishment based on one of the crimes formulated in articles 488 - 449, 446, and 467, the revocation of rights based on article 35 no. 1 - 4 may be declared.

Chapter XXIX A - Aviation Crimes and Crimes Against Aviation Facilities/Infrastructure

Article 479 a

(1) Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully destroys, makes unusable or damages a building for air traffic security or thwarts efforts to secure said building shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of nine years.


(2) With a maximum prison sentence of nine years if the act creates a danger to air traffic safety;

(3) With a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years if the act results in the death of a person.

Article 479 b

(1) Whoever, due to his negligence, causes the destruction, unusability or damage of a building for air traffic security, or the failure of efforts to secure said building, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of three years.


(2) With a maximum prison sentence of five years, if the act causes a danger to air traffic safety.

(3) With a maximum prison sentence of seven years, if the act results in the death of a person.

Article 479 c
(1) Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully destroys, damages, takes or moves signs or devices for aviation security, or prevents the operation of such signs or devices, or installs incorrect signs or devices, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of six years.

(2) With a maximum prison sentence of nine years, if the act causes a danger to aviation safety.

(3) With a maximum prison sentence of twelve years, if the act creates a danger to aviation safety and results in an aircraft accident.


(4) With a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years, if the act causes a danger to aviation safety and results in the death of a person.

Article 479d

Anyone who, due to negligence, causes a sign or device for aviation security to be destroyed, damaged, removed or moved or causes it to be unable to work or causes an incorrect sign or device for aviation security to be installed, shall be punished by:

a. with a maximum imprisonment of five years, if the act causes the flight to be unsafe;

b. with a maximum prison sentence of five years, if the act results in an aircraft accident;

c. with a maximum imprisonment of seven years, if the act results in the death of a person.

Article 479e

Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully destroys or renders unusable an aircraft which belongs in whole or in part to another person shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of nine years.

Article 479f

Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully harms, destroys, renders unusable or damages an aircraft shall be punished by:

a. with a maximum imprisonment of fifteen years, if the act causes danger to the life of another person;

b. with life imprisonment or imprisonment for a maximum of twenty years, if the act results in the death of a person.


Article 479g

Anyone who, due to negligence, causes an aircraft to be injured, destroyed, rendered unusable or damaged, shall be punished by:

a. with a maximum imprisonment of five years, if the act causes danger to the life of another person;

b. with a maximum imprisonment of seven years, if the act results in the death of a person.

Article 479h

(1) Whoever, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person, to the detriment of the insurer, causes a fire or explosion, accident, destruction, damage or renders an aircraft insured against the above-mentioned dangers unusable or whose cargo is insured or wages to be received for transporting the cargo, or for which insurance money has been received, shall be punished with imprisonment for a maximum of nine years.

(2) If what is meant in paragraph (1) of this article is an aircraft in flight, the penalty is imprisonment for a maximum of fifteen years.

(3) Anyone who, with the intention of unlawfully benefiting himself or another person to the detriment of the insurance underwriter, causes an insured aircraft passenger to be exposed to danger and has an accident, shall be punished by:


a. with a maximum imprisonment of ten years, if the act causes serious injury;

b. with a maximum prison sentence of fifteen years, if the act results in the death of a person.

Article 479i

Whoever, while on board an aircraft, unlawfully seizes or maintains the seizure or takes control of an aircraft in flight, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of twelve years.

Article 479j

Anyone who in an aircraft by violence or threat of violence or threat in any other form seizes or maintains the seizure or takes control of an aircraft in flight shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of fifteen years.


Passage 479 k

(1) Shall be punished with life imprisonment or a maximum imprisonment of twenty years, if the act referred to in Article 479 letter i and Article 479 letter i:

a. carried out by two or more people together;

b. as a continuation of an evil conspiracy;

c. carried out with prior planning;

d. causes damage to the aircraft so that it could endanger its flight;


e. causing serious injury to a person;

f. carried out with the intention of depriving someone of their freedom or continuing to deprive them of their freedom.

(2) If the act results in the death of a person or the destruction of the aircraft, the punishment shall be the death penalty or life imprisonment or a maximum imprisonment of twenty years.

Article 479l

Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully commits an act of violence against a person on board an aircraft during flight, if the act could endanger the safety of the aircraft, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of fifteen years.


Article 479 m

Anyone who intentionally and unlawfully damages an aircraft in service or causes damage to the aircraft which renders it incapable of flying or endangers flight safety shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of fifteen years.


Article 479n

Whoever intentionally and unlawfully places or causes to be placed in an aircraft in service, in any way, a device or material that can destroy the aircraft or cause damage to the aircraft that makes it unable to fly or causes damage to the aircraft that can endanger flight safety, shall be punished with imprisonment for a maximum of fifteen years.


Article 479o

(1) Sentenced to life imprisonment or imprisonment for a maximum of twenty years if the act referred to in article 479 letter l, article 479 letter m, and article 479 letter n:


a carried out by two or more people together;

b. as a continuation of an evil conspiracy;

c. carried out with prior planning;

d. causes serious injury to someone;

(2) If the act results in the death of a person or the destruction of the aircraft, he shall be punished with the death penalty or life imprisonment or imprisonment for a maximum of twenty years.

Article 479 p

Anyone who provides information which he knows is false and because of this act endangers the safety of an aircraft in flight, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of fifteen years.

Article 479 q

Anyone who, while on an aircraft, commits an act that could endanger the safety of the aircraft in flight, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of five years.


Article 479 r

Anyone who, while on an aircraft, commits acts that may disturb the order and discipline on board the aircraft during flight, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of one year.

Chapter XXX - Receipt of Publishing and Printing
Article 480

Threatened with a maximum prison sentence of four years or a maximum fine of nine hundred rupiah:

1. anyone who buys, rents, exchanges, accepts a pawn, receives a gift, or to make a profit, sells, rents, exchanges, pawns, transports, stores or hides an object, which is known or appropriate. it must be suspected that it was obtained from the crime of detention;


2. Anyone who makes a profit from the proceeds of something, which he knows or should suspect is obtained from a crime.


Article 481

(1) Anyone who makes it a habit to deliberately buy, exchange, accept pawns, store or hide goods obtained through crime, shall be subject to a maximum prison sentence of seven years.

(2) The guilty party may have their rights revoked based on Article 35 no. 1 - 4 and their right to conduct a search in which the crime was committed.

Article 482

The act as formulated in Article 480, is punishable by light receiving with a maximum prison sentence of three months or a maximum fine of nine hundred rupiah, if the crime from which the object was obtained is one of the crimes formulated in Articles 364, 373, and 379.

Article 483

Whoever publishes something written or a picture which, due to its nature, can be threatened with a criminal penalty, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum imprisonment sentence of one year or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if:

l. the perpetrator's name is not known and the publisher did not inform him of his name at the first warning after the prosecution was carried out against him;

2. the publisher already knows or should have suspected that at the time the writing or image was published, the perpetrator could not be prosecuted or would reside outside Indonesia.

Article 484

Anyone who prints writing or images that constitute a criminal act, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of one year and four months or a maximum imprisonment of one year or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah, if:


1. the person who ordered the printing of the goods is unknown, and after the prosecution was determined, he did not inform them at the first warning;


2. The printer knows or should suspect that the person who ordered the printing at the time of publication cannot be prosecuted or resides outside Indonesia.

Article 485

If the nature of the writing or image is a crime that can only be prosecuted upon complaint, then the publisher or printer in the two articles above can only be prosecuted upon complaint from the person who is the victim of the crime.

Book Three - Transgression
List of contents

1. Chapter I - Concerning Violations of Public Security for Persons or Property and Health
2. Chapter II - Violations of Public Order
3. Chapter III - Offenses Against Public Authority
4. Chapter IV - Violations Concerning Origin and Marriage
5. Chapter V - Violations Against People Who Need Help
6. Chapter VI - Violations of Morality
7. Chapter VII - Violations Regarding Land, Plants and Yards
8. Chapter VIII - Misconduct
9. Chapter IX - Shipping Violations

Chapter I - Concerning Violations of Public Security for Persons or Property and Health
Article 489

(1) Mischief against people or goods which can cause danger, loss or hardship, is punishable by a maximum fine of two hundred and twenty five rupiah.


(2) If at the time of committing the violation, one year has not passed since the criminal penalty became final due to the same violation, the fine may be replaced by a maximum of three days' imprisonment.

Article 490

Threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of six days, or a fine of up to three hundred rupiah:

1. Whoever incites an animal against a person or against an animal that is being ridden, or mounted on the front of a carriage or vehicle, or is carrying a load:

2. Whoever does not prevent an animal under his care, if the animal attacks a person or animal that is being ridden or mounted on the front of a train or vehicle, or is carrying a load:


3. Whoever does not take sufficient care of the wild animals under his care, so as not to cause harm;

4. Anyone who keeps dangerous wild animals without reporting it to the police or other officials appointed for this purpose, or does not comply with the regulations issued by said officials regarding this matter.


Article 491

Threatened with a maximum fine of seven hundred and fifty rupiah:

1. anyone who is obliged to look after a mad person who is dangerous to himself or others, allows that person to wander around unattended;

2. Anyone who is obliged to look after a child, leaves the child unattended so that danger may arise for the child or other people.


Article 492

(1) Anyone who, while drunk in public, obstructs traffic, or disturbs order, or threatens the safety of others, or does something which must be done with caution or with certain precautions taken beforehand so as not to endanger life or health.

other people, are threatened with a maximum imprisonment of six days, or a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy-five rupiah.

(2) If at the time of committing the violation, one year has not passed since the criminal conviction became final due to the same violation, or due to the matters formulated in Article 536, a maximum imprisonment of two weeks shall be imposed. Article 493


Anyone who unlawfully on a public road endangers the freedom of movement of another person, or continues to force himself together with one or more people against another person who does not want this and has been expressly stated, or follows another person in a disturbing manner, is threatened with a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 494

Threatened with a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy five rupiah:

1. anyone who does not provide sufficient lighting and customary signs when digging or piling up earth on a public road, which is carried out by or on his orders, or on objects placed there by or on his orders;


2. anyone who does not take the necessary action when carrying out work on or at the side of a public road to give a sign to those passing there that there is a potential danger;

3. anyone who places or hangs something on top of a building, throws or pours something out of it in such a way that it can cause harm to people using a public road;


4. anyone who allows riding animals, pulling animals or animals of burden to be left on a public road without taking precautions to prevent loss;

5. anyone who allows livestock to roam on public roads without taking precautions so as not to cause harm;

6. Whoever, without the permission of the competent authority, blocks a public road on land or water or causes an obstacle due to the improper use of a vehicle or ship.


Article 495

(1) Whoever, without the permission of the police chief or official appointed for that purpose, places trap mines, snares, or other tools in places where people pass by.

Catching or killing wild animals is punishable by a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy-five rupiah.

(2) If at the time of committing the violation, one year has not passed since the criminal sentence became final due to the same violation, the fine may be replaced by a maximum of six days' imprisonment.

Article 496

Anyone who, without the permission of the chief of police or an official appointed for that purpose, burns his own immovable property, shall be subject to a maximum fine of seven hundred and fifty rupiah.

Article 497

Threatened with a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy five rupiah:

1. anyone who, on a public road or at the edge of a public road, or in a place so close to buildings or objects that a fire hazard could arise, lights a fire without needing to fire a firearm;


2. Whoever releases a balloon from which flammable materials are hung.

Articles 498 and 499

Abolished based on S. 32 - 143 jo. 33 - 9.

Article 500

Anyone who, without the permission of the chief of police or an official appointed to do so, makes explosives, bullet points or bullets for firearms, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of ten days or a maximum fine of seven hundred and fifty rupiah.

Article 501

(1) Threatened with a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy five rupiah:

1. anyone who sells, offers, hands over, distributes or has in stock for sale or distribution, counterfeit or rotten food or drink, or milk from sick livestock or livestock that can harm health;


2. Whoever, without the permission of the chief of police or an official appointed for that purpose, sells, offers, hands over or distributes the meat of livestock that has been slaughtered because it is sick or died of its own accord.

(2) If at the time of committing the violation two years have not passed since a criminal conviction became final for the same violation, the fine may be replaced by a maximum of six days' imprisonment.

Article 502

(1) Anyone who, without permission from the competent authority, hunts or carries firearms into state forests where it is prohibited to do so without permission, shall be subject to a maximum imprisonment of one month or a maximum fine of three thousand rupiah;

(2) Animals caught or shot as well as tools and weapons used in the offense may be confiscated.

Chapter II - Violations of Public Order
Article 503

Threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of three days or a maximum fine of two hundred and twenty five rupiah:

1. anyone who makes noise or commotion, so that the peace of the night can be disturbed;

2. Anyone who makes noise near a building to carry out permitted worship or for a court hearing, when there is worship or a trial.


Article 504

(1) Anyone who begs in public is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of six weeks for begging.

(2) Begging carried out by three or more people, aged over sixteen years, is punishable by a maximum imprisonment of three months.

Article 505 (1) Anyone who wanders around without searching is threatened with vagrancy with a maximum imprisonment of three months.

(2) Vagrancy committed by three or more people aged over sixteen years is punishable by imprisonment for a maximum of six months.

Article 506

Anyone who profits from a woman's indecent acts and makes it his livelihood is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of one year.


Article 507

Threatened with a maximum fine of two thousand two hundred and fifty rupiah:

1. anyone who without authority uses a noble title, or an Indonesian honorary badge;

2. whoever without the President's permission, when it is required, accepts a foreign honor, title, rank or degree;

3. Whoever, when asked by the authorized official for his name, gives a false name.

Article 508

Anyone who without authority uses with the slightest deviation a name or service mark whose use, according to the provisions of the law, is solely for an association or association personnel, or military health service personnel, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of one month or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 508 bis
Anyone who in public without authority wears clothing that resembles the official clothing designated for civil servants or officials working for the state, in a province, in an independent region that is recognized or regulated by law so that he can be considered by people to be that employee or official, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of one month or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 509

Anyone who without permission lends money or goods on pledge, or in the form of a sale with the possibility of repurchase or in the form of a commission contract, the value of which does not exceed one hundred rupiah, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of three months, or a maximum fine of fifteen thousand rupiah.

Article 510

(1) Anyone who, without the permission of the chief of police or other official appointed for that purpose, shall be subject to a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy-five rupiah:

1. hold another party designated for that purpose:

2. holding a procession on a public road.

(2) If a procession is held to express desires in an amazing way, the person guilty is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of two weeks or a fine of two thousand two hundred and fifty rupiah.

Article 511

Anyone who, during a parade, etc., does not obey the orders and instructions issued by the police to prevent accidents due to traffic jams on public roads, is threatened with a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy-five rupiah.


Article 512

(1) Anyone who is not authorized to carry out a search for which, according to general regulations, he must be authorized to do so, and does so without obligation, shall be subject to a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) Anyone who is authorized to carry out a search for which, according to general regulations, he must be authorized to do so, in carrying out said search without having to exceed the limits of his authority, shall be threatened with a maximum fine of seven hundred and fifty rupiah.

(3) If at the time of committing the violation, two years have not passed since the criminal sentence became final due to the same violation, then in the case of the first paragraph, the fine can be replaced by imprisonment for a maximum of two months, and in the case of the second paragraph, a maximum of one month.

Article 512a

Anyone who, as a means of livelihood, either specifically or as a sideline, carries out the work of a doctor or dentist without having a permit, under circumstances that are not coercive, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of two months or a maximum fine of one hundred and fifty thousand rupiah.

Article 513

Anyone who uses or allows the use of another person's property which is in his possession due to an employment relationship or because of his profession, for use which is not permitted by the owner, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of six days or a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy-five rupiah.

Article 514

A daily worker, package carrier, messenger, carrier or coolie, who in carrying out his search makes negligence or deficiency in returning tools received for use, or in delivering goods received for transportation, is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of six days, or a fine of a maximum of three hundred and seventy-five rupiah.

Article 515

(1) Threatened with a maximum imprisonment of six days, or a maximum fine of seven hundred and fifty rupiah;

1. anyone who moves residence from the part of the city, village or hamlet where he lives, without first notifying the competent authorities stating his new place of residence;


2. Whoever, after settling in a part of a city, village or hamlet, does not notify the competent authority within a period of fourteen days, stating his name, occupation and place of origin.


(2) The provisions in the first paragraph do not apply to people who change residence and remain in the same city.

Article 516

(1) Any person who uses it as a search to provide a place to spend the night for another person, and does not have a continuous register, or does not record or order to record the name, search or occupation, place of residence, days of arrival and departure of the person who spends the night there, or at the request of the police chief or official appointed for that purpose, does not produce the register, is threatened with a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy-five rupiah.

(2) If at the time of committing the violation it has not been two years since the criminal penalty became final for the same violation, the fine may be replaced by a maximum of six days' imprisonment.

Article 517

(1) Threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of one month or a maximum fine of two thousand two hundred and fifty rupiah:

1. Whoever buys, exchanges, receives for worship, pawns, uses or keeps from a soldier below the rank of officer; or sells, pawns, lends or keeps the goods for a soldier below the rank of officer, which is given without permission from or in the name of the officer.


2. Whoever makes it a habit or pursuit to purchase such goods does not comply with the regulations regarding recording in the register as stipulated in the general regulations.

(2) If at the time of committing the violation two years have not passed since the criminal sentence became final due to the same violation, the punishment may be doubled.

Article 518

Anyone who without authority gives to or receives from a convict any goods shall be subject to a maximum imprisonment of six days or a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy-five rupiah.

Article 519

(1) Anyone who makes, sells, broadcasts or has in stock for sale or broadcast, or imports into Indonesia, printed materials, pieces of metal or other objects which resemble paper money, currency, gold or silver objects with state brands, or postage stamps, shall be subject to a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


(2) Objects which constitute an offense may be confiscated.

Article 519 bis
Threatened with a maximum imprisonment of three months, or a maximum fine of fifteen thousand rupiah:

1. anyone who announces the contents of what is received via a radio receiver used by him or under his control, which he should reasonably suspect is not intended for him or for publication, or informs another person, if he should reasonably suspect that it will be published and is indeed followed by an announcement;


2. Whoever announces news received via a radio receiver, if he himself, or the person from whom he received the news, is not authorized to do so.

Article 520

Threatened with a maximum imprisonment of three months:

1. anyone who, after receiving a postponement of debt payment, voluntarily carries out acts for which, according to general rules, cooperation with the management is required;


2. a manager or commissioner of a company, airline, association or foundation, who, after receiving a deferral of debt payment, of his own free will carries out acts for which, according to general regulations, cooperation with the manager is required.

Chapter III - Offenses Against Public Authority
Article 521

Anyone who violates the provisions of the general regulations that have been announced regarding the use and distribution of water from water equipment or irrigation structures for public purposes, is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of twelve days, or a fine of up to nine hundred rupiah.

Article 522

Anyone who, according to the law, is summoned as a witness, expert or interpreter, but fails to appear unlawfully, shall be subject to a maximum fine of nine hundred rupiah.

Article 523

Anyone who, without a valid reason, allows forced labor, village work or state plantation company work not to be carried out, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of three days or a maximum fine of ten rupiah.

If at the time of committing the violation it has not been six months since the criminal conviction became final due to the same violation, the perpetrator can be threatened with a maximum imprisonment of three months.

Article 524

Threatened with a maximum penalty of nine hundred rupiah:

1. Whoever in a case concerning a person who is not an adult, or a person who is already under guardianship, or a person who is about to be or has been put in a mental hospital, is summoned to be heard as a blood relative or by blood, as a husband/wife, guardian or supervising guardian by a judge or on his order by the police chief, does not appear in person or through a proxy if that is permitted, without an acceptable reason;

2. whoever in a case concerning a minor or a person who is or will be under guardianship, is summoned to be heard by the estate office or at the request of the police chief, does not appear in person or through his proxy if that is permitted, without an acceptable reason;


3. Whoever in a case concerning a minor is summoned to be heard by the guardianship council or at the request of the chief of police, does not appear in person or by proxy, without an acceptable reason.


Article 525

(1) Any person who, when there is a public danger to persons or property, or when a crime is caught red-handed, is asked for help by a public authority but refuses it, even though he is able to provide such help without placing

directly in a dangerous situation, shall be subject to a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy five rupiah;

(2) This provision does not apply to those who refuse to provide assistance because they want to avoid or ward off the danger of prosecution for one of their relatives by blood or marriage in a straight or deviant line, up to the second or third degree, or for their husband (wife) or ex-husband (wife).

Article 526

Anyone who tears up, makes illegible or damages a public notice issued by an authorized official or due to statutory provisions, shall be subject to a maximum fine of two hundred and twenty-five rupiah.

Article 527

Abolished by LN 1955 - 28.

Article 528

(1) Anyone who, without the permission of the competent authority, is threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of two months or a fine of a maximum of four thousand five hundred rupiah:
1. make copies or extracts of state official letters and instruments, which by order of the general authority must be kept secret;

2. announce all or part of the letters referred to in point 1;


3. announcing matters contained in the letters in point 1, even though it can reasonably be assumed that these matters should be kept confidential.

(2) The act is not punishable if the order to keep it secret is clearly given for reasons other than official or public interests.
Chapter IV - Violations Concerning Origin and Marriage
Article 529

Anyone who does not fulfill his/her obligation according to the law to report to the Civil Registry official or his/her intermediary about births and deaths, is threatened with a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 530

(1) A religious official who performs a marriage ceremony, which can only be performed in the presence of a Civil Registry official, before it is stated to him that

If the proceedings have been carried out in front of the official, the perpetrator is threatened with a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

(2) If at the time of committing the violation, two years have not passed since the criminal penalty became final for the same violation, the fine may be replaced by a maximum imprisonment of two months.

Chapter V

Violations Against People Who Need Help
Article 531

Whoever, when witnessing that someone is facing death, does not provide the assistance that can be given to him without causing danger to himself or others, is threatened, if the person subsequently dies, with a maximum imprisonment of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Chapter VI - Violations of Morality
Article 532

Threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of three days or a maximum fine of two hundred and twenty five rupiah:

1. anyone who sings songs in public that violate morality;


2. anyone who makes a speech in public that violates morality;


3. Whoever in a place visible from a public road displays writing or pictures that violate morality.

Article 533

Threatened with imprisonment for a maximum of two months or a fine of up to three thousand rupiah:

1. anyone who in a place for public traffic openly displays or posts writing with a title, cover or content that is made legible, or pictures or objects, which are capable of arousing the lusts of teenagers;


2. anyone who in a public traffic area openly plays written content that can arouse the lusts of teenagers;

3. Whoever openly or without being asked offers a text, picture or item that can arouse the lust of teenagers or openly or by broadcasting a text without being asked, indicates that it is available, a text or picture that can arouse the lust of teenagers;


4. anyone who offers, gives permanently or temporarily, hands over or shows such a picture or object to a minor or under the age of seventeen years;


5. anyone who listens to the contents of such writing in the presence of a person who is a minor and under the age of seventeen years.

Article 534

Anyone who openly displays a means of preventing pregnancy or openly or without being asked offers, or openly or by broadcasting a writing without being asked, indicates that such means or means (diensten) can be obtained, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of two months or a maximum fine of three thousand rupiah.



Article 536

(1) Anyone who is clearly drunk on a public road shall be subject to a maximum fine of two hundred and twenty five rupiah.

(2) If at the time of committing the violation, one year has not passed since the criminal sentence became final due to the same violation or as defined in Article 492, the fine may be replaced by a maximum of three days' imprisonment.


(3) If a second repetition occurs within one year after the first sentence ends and becomes permanent, a maximum imprisonment of two weeks shall be imposed.

(4) In the case of a third or more repetition within one year, after the subsequent conviction due to the second or more repetition becomes final, a maximum imprisonment of three months shall be imposed.

Article 537

Anyone who sells or gives alcoholic drinks or liquor to members of the Armed Forces below the rank of lieutenant or to their wives, children or servants outside the army canteen, shall be subject to a maximum imprisonment of three weeks or a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 538

A seller or his representative who sells alcoholic beverages who, in carrying out his work, gives or sells alcoholic beverages or arak to a child under sixteen years of age, is threatened with a maximum prison sentence of three weeks or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 539

Anyone who, on the occasion of a public party or public performance or a public procession, provides free alcoholic drinks or liquor and/or promises it as a prize, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of twelve days or a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy-five rupiah.


Article 540

(1) Threatened with a maximum imprisonment of eight days or a maximum fine of two thousand two hundred and fifty rupiah:

1. anyone who uses an animal for work that clearly exceeds its strength;

2. anyone who unnecessarily uses animals for work in a way that is painful or constitutes torture for the animal;


3. anyone who uses an animal that is lame or has other defects, is mangy, injured or is clearly pregnant or breastfeeding for work that due to its condition is not suitable or is painful or constitutes torture for the animal;


4. anyone who transports or orders an animal to be transported unnecessarily in a way that is painful or constitutes torture for the animal;

5. Anyone who transports or orders to transport animals without giving or ordering to give them food or drink.

(2) If at the time of committing the violation, one year has not passed since a criminal sentence became final due to the same violation due to one of the violations in Article 302, a maximum imprisonment of fourteen days may be imposed.

Article 541

(1) Threatened with a maximum fine of two hundred and twenty five rupiah;

1. goods ready to use as a pack horse, riding horse or pulling horse even though the horse has not yet changed gear or both

his inner teeth in the upper jaw have not yet reached the two inner teeth in the lower jaw;

2. Whoever puts harness on the horse mentioned in point 1 or ties or attaches the horse to a vehicle or a draft horse;


3. Anyone who uses a mother horse as a pack horse, mount or cart puller, by allowing her foal, which has not yet grown its six front teeth, to follow her.

(2) If at the time of committing the violation, one year has not passed since a criminal sentence became final due to the same violation or one based on Article 540, or due to a crime based on Article 302, the fine may be replaced by a maximum of three days' imprisonment.

Article 542

Abolished based on Law no. 7 of 1974.

Article 543

Dismissed pursuant to S.23 - 277, 352.

Article 544

(1) Anyone who, without the permission of the chief of police or an official appointed to do so, holds a cockfight or cricket fight on a public road or on the side of it, or in a place accessible to the general public, shall be subject to a maximum imprisonment of six days or a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy-five rupiah.


(2) If at the time of committing the violation one year has not passed since the criminal conviction became final due to the same violation, the penalty may be doubled.

Article 545

(1) Anyone who makes it his business to predict someone's fortune, to make predictions or interpret dreams, shall be punished by imprisonment for a maximum of six days or a fine of a maximum of three hundred rupiah.


(2) If at the time of committing the violation one year has not passed since the criminal conviction became final due to the same violation, the penalty may be doubled.

Article 546

Threatened with a maximum imprisonment of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah:

1. Threatened with a maximum imprisonment of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah:

2. anyone who sells, offers, hands over, distributes or has in stock for sale or distribution amulets or objects which he claims have supernatural powers;

3. Anyone who teaches knowledge or supernatural powers that aim to create the belief that committing a criminal act is without the possibility of harm to oneself.

Article 547

A witness, who when asked to give testimony under oath according to the provisions of the law, in a court hearing uses amulets or magical objects, is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of ten days or a maximum fine of seven hundred and fifty rupiah.

Chapter VII

Violations Regarding Land, Plants and Yards
Article 548

Anyone who without authority allows his livestock to roam in the garden, on land that has been sown, dug or planted, is threatened with a maximum fine of two hundred and twenty-five rupiah.

Article 549

(1) Anyone who without authority allows his livestock to wander in a garden, in a meadow or in a grassy field or in a dry meadow, whether on land that has been sown, dug or planted or the produce of which has not yet been taken, or on land belonging to another person which the rightful owner has prohibited entry to and which has been clearly marked with a prohibition for the violator, is threatened with a maximum fine of three hundred and seventy-five rupiah.


(2) Livestock that causes violations can be confiscated.

(3) If at the time of committing the violation one year has not passed since the criminal penalty became final due to the same violation, the fine may be replaced by a maximum imprisonment of fourteen days.

Article 550

Anyone who without authority walks or drives on land that has been sown, dug or planted, is threatened with a maximum fine of two hundred and twenty-five rupiah.


Article 551

Anyone who, without authority, walks or drives on land which the owner has expressly prohibited entry to, shall be subject to a maximum fine of two hundred and twenty-five rupiah.
Chapter VIII - Misconduct
Article 552

An official who is authorized to issue a copy or excerpt of a court decision, if he issues such a copy or excerpt before the decision has been properly signed, shall be subject to a maximum fine of seven hundred and fifty rupiah.


Article 553

Abolished under S. 35 - 576; see article 528.

Article 554

A former official who, without the permission of the competent authority, withholds official documents shall be subject to a maximum imprisonment of two months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 555

The head of a correctional institution, a place for temporarily detaining detainees or people who are being held hostage, or the head of a state educational institution or mental hospital, who receives or detains a person in that place without first requesting to be shown a letter of order from the competent authority or a court decision, or who fails to write down in accordance with the regulations in a list of the circumstances of the acceptance and the order or decision which is the reason for the person being accepted, shall be punished.


Article 556

A civil registry official who, before carrying out a marriage, does not request that he be given the evidence or information required according to general regulations, shall be subject to a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 557

Threatened with a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred rupiah:

1. a civil registry official who acts contrary to the provisions of general regulations regarding registers or civil registry deeds, regarding procedures prior to marriage or the implementation of marriage;


2. any other person who keeps the register who acts contrary to the provisions of the general rules regarding registers and civil registration deeds.

Article 557a

A civil registry agent who acts contrary to the provisions of the regulations for maintaining the civil registry of Chinese people is threatened with a maximum fine of seven hundred and fifty rupiah.

Article 558

A civil registry official who does not enter a deed in the register or writes a deed on loose paper, is threatened with a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 558a

A civil registry agent who does not make a deed of notification to him in accordance with the provisions on maintaining a civil registry register for Chinese people, or writes a deed on loose paper, is threatened with a maximum fine of two thousand two hundred and fifty rupiah.

Article 559

Threatened with a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred rupiah:

1. a civil registry official who does not report to the competent authority as required by statutory provisions;


2. an official who does not report to the civil registry official, as required by law.

Chapter IX - Maritime Violations
Article 560

An Indonesian ship captain who departs before the crew list required by law has been prepared and signed shall be subject to a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 561

An Indonesian ship captain who does not have on his ship the ship's papers, books and letters required by law, is threatened with a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 562

Threatened with a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah:

1. a captain of an Indonesian ship who does not ensure that the diaries on the ship are maintained according to general regulations, or does not show the diaries where and when according to the provisions of the law he is required to do so;

2. an Indonesian ship captain who does not maintain a criminal register as required by general regulations according to statutory provisions, or does not show it where and when statutory provisions require him to do so;

3. an Indonesian ship captain who, in the absence of a criminal register, does not provide information to the judge as required by law;

4. an Indonesian shipping entrepreneur, bookkeeper or ship captain who refuses a request to show the logbooks kept on his ship to the interested party, or refuses to provide copies of those logbooks, upon payment of the costs.


Article 563

An Indonesian ship captain who fails to fulfill his obligations under the law regarding the recording and notification of births and deaths during his voyage, is threatened with a maximum fine of one thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 564

A captain or crew member who does not pay attention to the provisions of the law to prevent collisions due to his ship breaking the law or being stranded, is threatened with a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 565

Anyone who, without authority, uses an identification mark, even with a slight change, according to the provisions of the law, which may only be used by hospital ships, lifeboats of such ships, or boats used for the work of caring for sick people, is threatened with criminal penalties.

imprisonment for a maximum of one month or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.


Article 566

An Indonesian ship captain who does not fulfill the obligations imposed on him according to Article 358a of the Commercial Code is threatened with a maximum imprisonment of three months or a maximum fine of four thousand five hundred rupiah.

Article 567

A port authority or captain of an Indonesian ship who uses for his crew work people who have not entered into an employment agreement as referred to in Article 395 of the Commercial Code or who do not run the company on board at his own expense, or who uses people whose names are not on the crew list, in cases where this is required by general regulations, is threatened with a maximum fine of nine hundred rupiah for each person who does such work.


Article 568

Anyone who signs a bill of lading issued in violation of the provisions of Article 517b of the Commercial Code, as well as any person for whom a signature is required in accordance with his/her authority, shall be threatened if the bill of lading is subsequently issued, with a maximum fine of seventy-five thousand rupiah.


Article 569

(1) Anyone who signs a delivery note issued in violation of the provisions of Article 533b of the Commercial Code, as well as any person for whom a signature is required in accordance with his authority, shall be threatened, if the note is subsequently issued, with a maximum fine of seventy-five thousand rupiah.

(2) Anyone who, contrary to Article 533b of the Commercial Code, provides a waybill that is not signed, and the same applies to the person to whom the letter is given according to his authority, shall be subject to the same penalty.

